Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Media
3D Print a Test of the Beer Bottle Neck
3D Printing a Clay Cookie Cutter-Stamper
A 3-minute Mug with Plainsman Polar Ice
A Broken Glaze Meets Insight-Live and a Magic Material
Accessing Recipes from "Mid-Fire Glazes" book in Insight-Live
Adjusting the Thixotropy of an Engobe for Pottery
Analysing a Crazing, Cutlery-marking Glaze Using Insight-Live
Compare the Chemistry of Recipes Using Insight-Live
Connecting an External Image to Insight-Live Pictures
Converting G1214M Cone 6 transparent glaze to G1214Z matte
Create a Synthetic Feldspar in Insight-Live
Creating a Cone 6 Oil-Spot Overglaze Effect
Design a Triangular Pottery Plate Block Mold in Fusion 360
Designing a Jigger Mold for a Bowl Using Fusion 360 CAD
Downloading and 3D-Printing a 3MF file
Draw a propeller in Fusion 360 for use on an overhead propeller mixer
Drawing a Mug Handle Mold in Fusion 360
Drawing a Mug Mold Using OnShape CAD
Enter a Recipe Into Insight-live
Entering TestData Into Insight-Live
Fine tune the thixotropy of a glaze or engobe slurry
Getting Frustrated With a 55% Gerstley Borate Glaze
How I Developed the G2926B Cone 6 Transparent Base Glaze
How I Formulated G2934 Cone 6 Silky MgO Matte Glaze Using Insight-Live
How to Apply a White Slip to Terra Cotta Ware
How to Paste a Recipe Into Insight-live
Importing Data into Insight-live
Importing Desktop Insight Recipes to Insight-live
Importing Generic CSV Recipe Data into Insight-Live
Insight-Live Meets a Silica Deprived Glaze Recipe
Insight-Live Quick Tour
Liner Glazing a Stoneware Mug
Make a precision plaster mold for slip casting using Fusion 360 and 3D Printing
Making ceramic glaze flow test balls
Making test bars for the SHAB, LDW and DFAC tests
Manually program your kiln or suffer glaze defects!
Mica and Feldspar Mine of MGK Minerals
Predicting Glaze Durability by Chemistry in Insight-Live
Preparing Pictures for Insight-live
Replace Lithium Carbonate With Lithium Frit Using Insight-Live
Replacing 10% Gerstley Borate in a clear glaze
Same Beer Bottle Mold Using Fusion 360 and OnShape CAD
Signing Up at Insight-live.com
Signing-In at Insight-live.com
Slip cast a stoneware beer bottle
Substitute Ferro Frit 3134 For Another Frit
Substituting Custer Feldspar for Another in a Cone 10R Glaze Recipe
Thixotropy and How to Gel a Ceramic Glaze
Use Insight-live to substitute materials in a recipe
Watch Thixotropy Happen With a 20kg Batch of Dipping Glaze
Liner Glazing a Stoneware Mug
I will show you how to glaze a mug with a liner glaze inside and a colored one outside so that they meet in a perfect line at the rim.
Click here
to watch this at youtube.com
 or
click here
to go to our Youtube channel
Transcript/Notes
There are decorative and
functional
reasons to glazing the outside and inside of mugs as a separate operation. First, liner glazes are far less likely to leach harmful things into food or drink.
Liner glazed
mugs advertise to your customers that you are thinking about this. There are aesthetic reasons to have a different glaze inside and out. If your mugs have thin walls, glazing them in one operation is much more likely to water log them (glazes are much less likely to crack or bubble when they dry quickly). This method enables handling the mugs seconds after the final outside coat so that you can sponge the
foot ring
quickly.
For this to work well your wax needs to be the right consistency (not too thick). And it needs to dry for a while to resist better. I have found the Laguna Premium Wax resist works well. But Reed Wax is even better. Also, your glaze must not be too thick or heavy. Adjust the
slurry
to 1.43-1.45
specific gravity
and add
epsom salts
to gel it to creamy consistency (stir the bucket, pull out the spatula, it should stop in 2-4 seconds). That will resist well.
more..
Links
Glossary
Liner Glaze
Liner-glazing is a way to assure that your ware has a durable and leach resistant surface. It also signals to customers that you care about this.
Articles
Is Your Fired Ware Safe?
Glazed ware can be a safety hazard to end users because it may leach metals into food and drink, it could harbor bacteria and it could flake of in knife-edged pieces.
Commercial glazes on decorative surfaces
Your own on food surfaces
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
These
cone 6
porcelain
mugs are hybrid. Three coats of a
commercial glaze
painted on the outside (Amaco PC-30) and my own
liner glaze
,
G2926B
, poured in and out on the inside. When
commercial glazes
(made by one company) fit a
stoneware
or porcelain (made by another company) it is by accident, neither company designed for the other! For inside food surfaces make or mix a liner glaze already proven to fit your
clay body
, one that
sanity-checks
well (as a
dipping glaze
or a
brushing glaze
). In your own recipes you can use quality materials that you know deliver no toxic compounds to the glass and that are proportioned to deliver a
balanced chemistry
. Read and watch our
liner glazing step-by-step
and
liner glazing video
for details on how to make glazes meet at the rim like this.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy