Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Media
3D Print a Test of the Beer Bottle Neck
3D Printing a Clay Cookie Cutter-Stamper
A 3-minute Mug with Plainsman Polar Ice
A Broken Glaze Meets Insight-Live and a Magic Material
Accessing Recipes from "Mid-Fire Glazes" book in Insight-Live
Adjusting the Thixotropy of an Engobe for Pottery
Analysing a Crazing, Cutlery-marking Glaze Using Insight-Live
Compare the Chemistry of Recipes Using Insight-Live
Connecting an External Image to Insight-Live Pictures
Converting G1214M Cone 6 transparent glaze to G1214Z matte
Create a Synthetic Feldspar in Insight-Live
Creating a Cone 6 Oil-Spot Overglaze Effect
Design a Triangular Pottery Plate Block Mold in Fusion 360
Designing a Jigger Mold for a Bowl Using Fusion 360 CAD
Downloading and 3D-Printing a 3MF file
Draw a propeller in Fusion 360 for use on an overhead propeller mixer
Drawing a Mug Handle Mold in Fusion 360
Drawing a Mug Mold Using OnShape CAD
Enter a Recipe Into Insight-live
Entering TestData Into Insight-Live
Fine tune the thixotropy of a glaze or engobe slurry
Getting Frustrated With a 55% Gerstley Borate Glaze
How I Developed the G2926B Cone 6 Transparent Base Glaze
How I Formulated G2934 Cone 6 Silky MgO Matte Glaze Using Insight-Live
How to Apply a White Slip to Terra Cotta Ware
How to Paste a Recipe Into Insight-live
Importing Data into Insight-live
Importing Desktop Insight Recipes to Insight-live
Importing Generic CSV Recipe Data into Insight-Live
Insight-Live Meets a Silica Deprived Glaze Recipe
Insight-Live Quick Tour
Liner Glazing a Stoneware Mug
Make a precision plaster mold for slip casting using Fusion 360 and 3D Printing
Making ceramic glaze flow test balls
Making test bars for the SHAB, LDW and DFAC tests
Manually program your kiln or suffer glaze defects!
Mica and Feldspar Mine of MGK Minerals
Predicting Glaze Durability by Chemistry in Insight-Live
Preparing Pictures for Insight-live
Replace Lithium Carbonate With Lithium Frit Using Insight-Live
Replacing 10% Gerstley Borate in a clear glaze
Same Beer Bottle Mold Using Fusion 360 and OnShape CAD
Signing Up at Insight-live.com
Signing-In at Insight-live.com
Slip cast a stoneware beer bottle
Substitute Ferro Frit 3134 For Another Frit
Substituting Custer Feldspar for Another in a Cone 10R Glaze Recipe
Thixotropy and How to Gel a Ceramic Glaze
Use Insight-live to substitute materials in a recipe
Watch Thixotropy Happen With a 20kg Batch of Dipping Glaze
How to Apply a White Slip to Terra Cotta Ware
I will show you some secrets of making a base engobe (or slip) apply to leather hard terracotta ware in a thick, perfectly even layer.
Click here
to watch this at youtube.com
 or
click here
to go to our Youtube channel
Transcript/Notes
The slip is
L3685U
. I specially formulated it to fire as a
stoneware
at cone 03 (it contains significant
frit
). It works as a slip or as a body and I made a matching red (based on
Redart
) that also works as a
vitreous
slip or body at cone 03 (thus they can be used on each other). It has 45%
kaolin
and 3%
bentonite
, far more clay than any typical glaze, so it forms a
slurry
that responds well to
Epsom Salts
to make it gel (vinegar does not work as well). This slip also paints and trails well thus enabling stain additions for making brightly colored decoration. After
bisque
the slip decoration can be sealed on using the clear glaze (I am also actively developing a recipe for it).
Many people just use a white clay for an
engobe
at
low fire
, but this is not a good idea. Slips need to adhere well to the
leather hard
ware (very plastic slips work best). They need to dry hard and without cracks or flaking off. They need to fire onto the ware and adhere well to the fired ceramic below, that is not the norm at low fire so they need frit added.
Engobes
need to have a
fired shrinkage
very similar to the body (to minimize compression or tension). They need to have a
thermal expansion
compatible with that of the body (to minimize shivering/flaking). If you use this slip on a regular
terra cotta
(having no frit to make it vitrify) you will likely have issues.
more..
Links
Recipes
L3685U - Cone 03 White Engobe Recipe
A white burning body with enough added
frit
to produce a cone 03
stoneware
or white slip for use on the matching red
Zero3 stoneware
.
Recipes
L3724F - Cone 03 Terra Cotta Stoneware
An experimental
Zero3
using
Plainsman
3D clay
Glossary
Engobe
Engobes
are high-clay slurries that are applied to
leather hard
or dry
ceramics
. They fire opaque and are used for
functional
or decorative purposes. They are formulated to match the
firing shrinkage
and
thermal expansion
of the body.
Glossary
Thixotropy
Thixotropy
is a property of ceramic slurries of high
water content
.
Thixotropic
suspensions flow when moving but gel after sitting (for a few moments more depending on application). This phenomenon is helpful in getting even, drip-free glaze coverage.
Glossary
Terra Cotta
A type of red firing pottery.
Terra cotta
clay is available almost everywhere, it is fired at low temperatures. But quality is deceptively difficult to achieve.
Glossary
Majolica
Majolica
is a tradition of Italian Renaissance white opaque glazed red
earthenware
having brightly colored brushwork decoration. Knowing some technical details will help you better succeed with the process.
Cone 03 stoneware. Red and white body and slips. Clear glaze.
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Cone 03 white
stoneware
with red
terra cotta
ball-milled
slip and transparent
overglaze
. They are
L3685U
engobe
(Ferro
frit 3110
, #6 tile
kaolin
,
Silica
), near the final mix for a white
low fire
stoneware. The G1916J glaze is super clear. Why? Two reasons. These were fired in a schedule designed to burn off the gases from the
bentonite
in the body before the glaze fuses (it soaks the kiln for 2 hours at 1400F). Terra cotta clays generate alot of gases at cone 03 (producing glaze
micro-bubbles
), but here the terra cotta is only a thin slip over the much cleaner burning white body.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy