Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Media
3D Print a Test of the Beer Bottle Neck
3D Printing a Clay Cookie Cutter-Stamper
A 3-minute Mug with Plainsman Polar Ice
A Broken Glaze Meets Insight-Live and a Magic Material
Accessing Recipes from "Mid-Fire Glazes" book in Insight-Live
Adjusting the Thixotropy of an Engobe for Pottery
Analysing a Crazing, Cutlery-marking Glaze Using Insight-Live
Compare the Chemistry of Recipes Using Insight-Live
Connecting an External Image to Insight-Live Pictures
Converting G1214M Cone 6 transparent glaze to G1214Z matte
Create a Synthetic Feldspar in Insight-Live
Creating a Cone 6 Oil-Spot Overglaze Effect
Design a Triangular Pottery Plate Block Mold in Fusion 360
Designing a Jigger Mold for a Bowl Using Fusion 360 CAD
Downloading and 3D-Printing a 3MF file
Draw a propeller in Fusion 360 for use on an overhead propeller mixer
Drawing a Mug Handle Mold in Fusion 360
Drawing a Mug Mold Using OnShape CAD
Enter a Recipe Into Insight-live
Entering TestData Into Insight-Live
Fine tune the thixotropy of a glaze or engobe slurry
Getting Frustrated With a 55% Gerstley Borate Glaze
How I Developed the G2926B Cone 6 Transparent Base Glaze
How I Formulated G2934 Cone 6 Silky MgO Matte Glaze Using Insight-Live
How to Apply a White Slip to Terra Cotta Ware
How to Paste a Recipe Into Insight-live
Importing Data into Insight-live
Importing Desktop Insight Recipes to Insight-live
Importing Generic CSV Recipe Data into Insight-Live
Insight-Live Meets a Silica Deprived Glaze Recipe
Insight-Live Quick Tour
Liner Glazing a Stoneware Mug
Make a precision plaster mold for slip casting using Fusion 360 and 3D Printing
Making ceramic glaze flow test balls
Making test bars for the SHAB, LDW and DFAC tests
Manually program your kiln or suffer glaze defects!
Mica and Feldspar Mine of MGK Minerals
Predicting Glaze Durability by Chemistry in Insight-Live
Preparing Pictures for Insight-live
Replace Lithium Carbonate With Lithium Frit Using Insight-Live
Replacing 10% Gerstley Borate in a clear glaze
Same Beer Bottle Mold Using Fusion 360 and OnShape CAD
Signing Up at Insight-live.com
Signing-In at Insight-live.com
Slip cast a stoneware beer bottle
Substitute Ferro Frit 3134 For Another Frit
Substituting Custer Feldspar for Another in a Cone 10R Glaze Recipe
Thixotropy and How to Gel a Ceramic Glaze
Use Insight-live to substitute materials in a recipe
Watch Thixotropy Happen With a 20kg Batch of Dipping Glaze
A 3-minute Mug with Plainsman Polar Ice
Tony Hansen takes you through the steps from opening the box and wedging the clay to taking the fired mug from the kiln.
Click here
to watch this at youtube.com
 or
click here
to go to our Youtube channel
Transcript/Notes
This is an incredible
cone 6
translucent
porcelain
made by
Plainsman
Clays.
Notice the first thing I do is scan the QR Code on the box to check the data sheet. This is important because this material is so much different to work with than other bodies. Of course you can just visit
Plainsmanclays.com
and find the
Polar Ice
page there also.
You will also notice that I have lots of difficulty softening up the rock-hard slug, that is how it comes. But it does soften right up, in fact it was too soft for me so I put it on my
plaster bat
for a while to stiffen it a little (with a body like this do not use it unless it is just the right stiffness for you, I do not like really soft clay).
It is incredibly sticky, sticky to wedge, sticky to move on the wheelhead if you need to get it on center, it water-sticks to the wheelhead so much you have to cut it off, it is very sticky to trim and it balls up under your fingers if you try to round edges after trimming (using your finger). But the
throwing
is fantastic, nothing else is like it. Its
leather hard
and dry strength are also really good and it dries very well. After that, firing and glazing is like any other porcelain. Of course, since it is so
vitreous
you do have to pay attention to the cross sectional strength of your ware so it does not warp in the kiln.
more..
Links
URLs
https://plainsmanclays.ca/index.php?menupath=18
About
Plainsman
Clays
Glossary
Porcelain
How do you make
porcelain
? There is a surprisingly simple logic to formulating them and to adjusting their working, drying, glazing and firing properties for different purposes.
Now that is a translucent porcelain! But much more.
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
These are two
cone 6
transparent-glazed
porcelain
mugs. On the left is the porcelainous
Plainsman
M370
(Laguna B-Mix 6 would have similar
opacity
- none). Right is the highly
vitreous
, New Zealand kaolin-based porcelain,
Polar Ice
. The secret to making this porcelain super-white is the NZ
kaolin
. The secret of its impossibly high
plasticity
is the very expensive
plasticizer
,
VeeGum T
. What about the
translucency
? That is a little more complicated.
Nepheline syenite
is used as the
feldspar
, but it alone, in a practical recipe, cannot deliver this kind of translucency at cone 6. Amazingly, the 4% Veegum acts as a translucency catalyst; it is the real secret. Commercial manufacturers could never use a sticky and difficult-to-dry porcelain like this, but a potter can do incredible things with it (e.g. throw thinner, lighter, bigger than any other clay he/she has ever used!). Can you make this? Yes. Try the
L3778D
or
L3778G
recipes.
The fantastic throwing of Plainsman Polar Ice
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
This vase is 14 1/2 inches tall after drying yet was made from only about 5 1/2 lbs of clay. This is really plastic! The walls are only 3/16 thick on average (I did a little trimming on the bottom 3-4 inches). It wants to be thin and tall. It is easy to get it too thin at the bottom and too thick at the top!
If you over fire a translucent porcelain like Polar Ice, what happens?
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Overfired
Polar Ice
porcelain
. This bowl fired with an oval-shaped rim and was sticking to the shelf.
Polar Ice makes great eyeballs
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
These are made by Leslie Hirsch
Made from Polar Ice by KyoungHwa Oh from Korea
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Polar Ice
at
cone 6
. Glaze is
Plainsman
G2926B
with green stain added. These pieces were done by the visiting artist at the Medalta Artists in Residence program in 2014.
A good base glaze, a vitreous clay and a good fit. How good that is!
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Left:
Cone 10R
buff
stoneware
with a silky transparent
Ravenscrag
glaze. Right:
Cone 6
Polar Ice
translucent
porcelain
with
G2916F
transparent glaze. What do these two have in common? Much effort was put into building these two
base glazes
(to which colors,
variegators
,
opacifiers
can be added) so that they fire to a durable, non-marking surface and have good working properties during production. They also fit, each of these mugs survives a boil:ice water
thermal shock
without
crazing
(
BWIW test
). And the clays? These are
vitreous
and strong. So these pieces will survive many years of use.
Is the clay too stiff to use? Maybe not.
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Clays of very high
plasticity
often stiffen during storage in the bag. This is
Plainsman
Polar Ice
, it contains 4% VeeGum. This slug is like a brick, yet it will loosen up completely. But it is far too stiff to attempt
wedging
. However, simply
throwing
it on the floor a few times (turning it each time) will pre-soften it enough to be able to wedge. Then, before you know it, it is too soft and needs to be put on a
plaster table
to stiffen it before throwing.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy