Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Media
3D Print a Test of the Beer Bottle Neck
3D Printing a Clay Cookie Cutter-Stamper
A 3-minute Mug with Plainsman Polar Ice
A Broken Glaze Meets Insight-Live and a Magic Material
Accessing Recipes from "Mid-Fire Glazes" book in Insight-Live
Adjusting the Thixotropy of an Engobe for Pottery
Analysing a Crazing, Cutlery-marking Glaze Using Insight-Live
Compare the Chemistry of Recipes Using Insight-Live
Connecting an External Image to Insight-Live Pictures
Converting G1214M Cone 6 transparent glaze to G1214Z matte
Create a Synthetic Feldspar in Insight-Live
Creating a Cone 6 Oil-Spot Overglaze Effect
Design a Triangular Pottery Plate Block Mold in Fusion 360
Designing a Jigger Mold for a Bowl Using Fusion 360 CAD
Downloading and 3D-Printing a 3MF file
Draw a propeller in Fusion 360 for use on an overhead propeller mixer
Drawing a Mug Handle Mold in Fusion 360
Drawing a Mug Mold Using OnShape CAD
Enter a Recipe Into Insight-live
Entering TestData Into Insight-Live
Fine tune the thixotropy of a glaze or engobe slurry
Getting Frustrated With a 55% Gerstley Borate Glaze
How I Developed the G2926B Cone 6 Transparent Base Glaze
How I Formulated G2934 Cone 6 Silky MgO Matte Glaze Using Insight-Live
How to Apply a White Slip to Terra Cotta Ware
How to Paste a Recipe Into Insight-live
Importing Data into Insight-live
Importing Desktop Insight Recipes to Insight-live
Importing Generic CSV Recipe Data into Insight-Live
Insight-Live Meets a Silica Deprived Glaze Recipe
Insight-Live Quick Tour
Liner Glazing a Stoneware Mug
Make a precision plaster mold for slip casting using Fusion 360 and 3D Printing
Making ceramic glaze flow test balls
Making test bars for the SHAB, LDW and DFAC tests
Manually program your kiln or suffer glaze defects!
Mica and Feldspar Mine of MGK Minerals
Predicting Glaze Durability by Chemistry in Insight-Live
Preparing Pictures for Insight-live
Replace Lithium Carbonate With Lithium Frit Using Insight-Live
Replacing 10% Gerstley Borate in a clear glaze
Same Beer Bottle Mold Using Fusion 360 and OnShape CAD
Signing Up at Insight-live.com
Signing-In at Insight-live.com
Slip cast a stoneware beer bottle
Substitute Ferro Frit 3134 For Another Frit
Substituting Custer Feldspar for Another in a Cone 10R Glaze Recipe
Thixotropy and How to Gel a Ceramic Glaze
Use Insight-live to substitute materials in a recipe
Watch Thixotropy Happen With a 20kg Batch of Dipping Glaze
Use Insight-live to substitute materials in a recipe
We will substitute wollastonite for whiting and a frit for Gerstley borate in the G2571A cone 10 matte while maintaining the chemistry of the original recipe.
Click here
to watch this at youtube.com
 or
click here
to go to our Youtube channel
Transcript/Notes
A two-minute silent video with annotations.
more..
Links
Recipes
G2571A - Cone 10 Silky Dolomite Matte glaze
A
cone 10R
dolomite
matte having a pleasant silky surface, it does not cutlery mark, stain or
craze
on common bodies
Glossary
Glaze Gelling
Glaze slurries can gel if they contain soluble materials that flocculate the
suspension
. Gelling is a real problem since it requires water additions that increase shrinkage.
Typecodes
Gerstley Borate Substitutes
Many development efforts to create
Gerstley Borate
substitutes took place during the early 2000s (the initial period when the demise of Gerstley
Borate
appeared imminent). A number of companies, including Laguna Clays itself, produced and sold these for many years. When Laguna secured another stockpile at the mine and began producing the original material again, interest in substitutes gradually waned. However, the sudden dramatic price increase in 2023 appears to have initiated the process again.
Gillespie Borate
appears to be the only viable and visible substitute now.

Thus, the substitutes listed here are mostly no longer made. Other high-boron materials shown are also no longer available.

We continue to recommend sourcing
B2O3
from
frits
instead. Please contact us if you have a specific recipe and we can work with you in your
Insight-live
account to develop a new recipe that both eliminates the GB and improves overall working and firing properties.
Typecodes
Gerstley Borate Glaze Calculation examples
Examples of how we use glaze calculations (in an
Insight-Live
.com account) to replace
Gerstley Borate
with other materials, especially
frits
, in various
glaze recipes
. In doing so we take the opportunity to improve the recipe in other ways (e.g. reduce
thermal expansion
, improve
slurry
properties, reduce
bubbling
and
crawling
).
Colemanite and what its decrepitation does in glazes
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Decrepitation refers to a
decomposition
accompanied by scaling, delayering, even disintegration of the glaze layer. Moving rightward these glazes have increasing percentages of colemanite. At its worst (far right) the glaze is spattering off the sample and onto the kiln shelf. The others are
crawling
, first pulling away from the corners (far left) moving toward pulling away on the flat surfaces (center).
Gerstley Borate
and
Ulexite
, similar minerals, are far less likely to do this (but they have other serious issues also). A much better solution is to use
frits
to source the oxide
B
2
O
3
(easy to do in your account at
Insight-live
.com). Photos courtesy of Nigel Hicken.
A unfritted tile glaze is boiling and spattering the kiln shelf above
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
What you are seeing here is strange indeed. On the bottom is a
porcelain
tile that was glazed using the recipe indicated. Multiple ones of these were stacked into a kiln, each on its own round kiln shelf. During the firing the boiling of the glaze melt was so violent that it splashed upward, coating the undersides of the shelves above them. Yet no glaze was splattered around the tiles themselves! This phenomenon was created and reported by a researcher working on leadless ultra-gloss metallic tile glazes. This recipe is part of a project to create a similar
chemistry
to previous work done with Fusion
Frit FZ-16
. Glazes made using that
frit
do not have this boiling problem and produce surfaces comparable to leaded
frits
. We speculate that the vigorous melt is a product of the interaction between the high
zinc oxide
and
borax
in the recipe.
Original glaze with Gerstley Borate vs. improved version with frit
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
These pieces are fired at the same temperature. The glaze on the left is a popular recipe found online, Worthington Clear (our
code number
G2931
). The
Gerstley Borate
in it is "farting" as the glaze is melting (the calculated
LOI
of the glaze as a whole is 15% mainly from that one material). Unless applied very thinly tons of
micro-bubbles
appear (this example is fired to cone 03). And strange, it is
crazing
badly also despite the low
calculated thermal expansion
. Using my account at
insight-live
.com I was able to source the
B
2
O
3
and
MgO
from a
frit
(actually two
frits
) to create the
G2931K
recipe. Although the
thermal expansion
calculates higher it is strangely fitting better (albeit not firing as white). As you can see, the new
fritted
glaze is very glassy and clear (thick or thin).
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy