Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Media
3D Print a Test of the Beer Bottle Neck
3D Printing a Clay Cookie Cutter-Stamper
A 3-minute Mug with Plainsman Polar Ice
A Broken Glaze Meets Insight-Live and a Magic Material
Accessing Recipes from "Mid-Fire Glazes" book in Insight-Live
Adjusting the Thixotropy of an Engobe for Pottery
Analysing a Crazing, Cutlery-marking Glaze Using Insight-Live
Compare the Chemistry of Recipes Using Insight-Live
Connecting an External Image to Insight-Live Pictures
Converting G1214M Cone 6 transparent glaze to G1214Z matte
Create a Synthetic Feldspar in Insight-Live
Creating a Cone 6 Oil-Spot Overglaze Effect
Design a Triangular Pottery Plate Block Mold in Fusion 360
Designing a Jigger Mold for a Bowl Using Fusion 360 CAD
Downloading and 3D-Printing a 3MF file
Draw a propeller in Fusion 360 for use on an overhead propeller mixer
Drawing a Mug Handle Mold in Fusion 360
Drawing a Mug Mold Using OnShape CAD
Enter a Recipe Into Insight-live
Entering TestData Into Insight-Live
Fine tune the thixotropy of a glaze or engobe slurry
Getting Frustrated With a 55% Gerstley Borate Glaze
How I Developed the G2926B Cone 6 Transparent Base Glaze
How I Formulated G2934 Cone 6 Silky MgO Matte Glaze Using Insight-Live
How to Apply a White Slip to Terra Cotta Ware
How to Paste a Recipe Into Insight-live
Importing Data into Insight-live
Importing Desktop Insight Recipes to Insight-live
Importing Generic CSV Recipe Data into Insight-Live
Insight-Live Meets a Silica Deprived Glaze Recipe
Insight-Live Quick Tour
Liner Glazing a Stoneware Mug
Make a precision plaster mold for slip casting using Fusion 360 and 3D Printing
Making ceramic glaze flow test balls
Making test bars for the SHAB, LDW and DFAC tests
Manually program your kiln or suffer glaze defects!
Mica and Feldspar Mine of MGK Minerals
Predicting Glaze Durability by Chemistry in Insight-Live
Preparing Pictures for Insight-live
Replace Lithium Carbonate With Lithium Frit Using Insight-Live
Replacing 10% Gerstley Borate in a clear glaze
Same Beer Bottle Mold Using Fusion 360 and OnShape CAD
Signing Up at Insight-live.com
Signing-In at Insight-live.com
Slip cast a stoneware beer bottle
Substitute Ferro Frit 3134 For Another Frit
Substituting Custer Feldspar for Another in a Cone 10R Glaze Recipe
Thixotropy and How to Gel a Ceramic Glaze
Use Insight-live to substitute materials in a recipe
Watch Thixotropy Happen With a 20kg Batch of Dipping Glaze
Create a Synthetic Feldspar in Insight-Live
A step-by-step of how to duplicate the chemistry of Minspar by mixing other materials. You will learn the calculate process, the type of testing to do and how to keep track of the results with notes, pictures and links.
You can also watch this at
Screencast-o-matic.com
Transcript/Notes
First, let's see how to do the
chemistry
part.
In my
Insight-Live
account, I have made a recipe with only Minspar, I'll open it.
Let's look at the chemistry of Minspar (click on it), it has 6.5-to-4 of sodium vs. potassium.
In the Materials Manager I with search "nepheline|custer" (to show both).
Clicking on each to show their chemistry makes it evident that
Custer feldspar
has the reverse sodium/potassium (K:Na) ratio of Minspar and Nepheline has a little more
Na
2
O
but a lot less
SiO
2
.
more..
So it seems a blend of Custer and Nepheline could work, the latter diluting the amount of
K
2
O
in Custer down to what Minspar has. However in doing that I will under-shoot the Na
2
O, I will need an auxiliary concentrated source of Na
2
O.
I create a new recipe with three lines, Nepheline (50 parts), Custer (50 parts) and Ferro
Frit 3110
(zero parts). I will name the recipe and give it a
code number
(that code number links fired tests with their Insight-live records). Click "Done Editing", turn on the formula calculation for this recipe and assess.
This initial guess-recipe produces too much K
2
O and not enough Na
2
O.
Turn on Calculation Mode with an increment of 5.
Reduce Custer and increase Nepheline and try to match the K
2
O and Na
2
O. It becomes evident that extra Na
2
O is needed: Add 5 of the
frit
. Then 10.
As we zero-in it becomes evident a little
CaO
is needed: Add 1
Calcium Carbonate
. Then 1.5%.
At 60 Nepheline, 16 Custer, 6 Frit 3110 and 1.5 whiting we have all the fluxes matched.
The
Al
2
O
3
and SiO
2
need to be increased so add
kaolin
and
silica
to the recipe.
Nudge up the kaolin until Al
2
O
3
matches, the silica until SiO
2
matches.
Retotal the recipe to 100.
This is only a small part of the work, now I must start testing.
Notice the work I have done: I entered notes; did a
melt flow
comparison test comparing how Minspar and this substitute melt at
cone 6
, I uploaded that picture and annotated it.
Next I tested it in a recipe called "Perfect Clear" - I'll search that and open it to the right. We mixed that recipe using Minspar and the substitute, glazed test tiles and did another side-by-side flow test - carefully documenting the results of all tests with notes and pictures. This gives us an audit trail of all the testing that was done here.
Let's link this
L4441B
to the Perfect Clear recipe.
It is also possible to find these recipes in our account by searching recent pictures and clicking on one - it shows what recipes it is linked to.
We have a group account at Insight-live, it has 11,000 recipes that Joe Schmidt I have done tests on in the last 40 years! Everything we have done is recorded with notes, pictures, data and calculations.
Links
Media
Substitute Ferro Frit 3134 For Another Frit
I use my
Insight-live
account to do the
glaze chemistry
to replace Ferro
frit 3134
with combinations of three other common Ferro
frits
. We will see the challenges of doing this in three different types of recipes.
Calculating a substitute for Minspar
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Why do this? We did not have it in stock and customers needed to mix recipes. When the chemistries of the two
feldspars
are very similar substitution is often not a problem, especially when a recipe only calls for 5 or 10%. However, when a recipe calls for a significant percentage the situation becomes much trickier (in our
cone 6
test recipe, "Perfect Clear", 40% Minspar is needed). Feldspars are almost a glaze in themselves, just needing
silica
and alumina to shift their
chemistry
toward 'glazedom'. In this project I calculated a mix of materials, in my
Insight-live
.com account, that sources the same chemistry as Minspar. I made cone 6 GLFL tests comparing the pure Minspar and Minspar substitute (left) and comparing the Perfect Clear glaze with each
feldspar
(right). As you can see, the similarity in
melt flow
is stunning! This is a good demonstration of just how practical and valuable
glaze chemistry
calculation can be.
Click here for case-studies of Insight-Live fixing problems
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
You will see examples of replacing unavailable materials (especially
frits
), fixing various issues (e.g. running,
crazing
,
settling
), making them melt more, adjusting matteness, etc.
Insight-Live
has an extensive help system (the round blue icon on the left) that also deals with fixing real-world problems and understanding glazes and
clay bodies
.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy