Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Media
3D Print a Test of the Beer Bottle Neck
3D Printing a Clay Cookie Cutter-Stamper
A 3-minute Mug with Plainsman Polar Ice
A Broken Glaze Meets Insight-Live and a Magic Material
Accessing Recipes from "Mid-Fire Glazes" book in Insight-Live
Adjusting the Thixotropy of an Engobe for Pottery
Analysing a Crazing, Cutlery-marking Glaze Using Insight-Live
Compare the Chemistry of Recipes Using Insight-Live
Connecting an External Image to Insight-Live Pictures
Converting G1214M Cone 6 transparent glaze to G1214Z matte
Create a Synthetic Feldspar in Insight-Live
Creating a Cone 6 Oil-Spot Overglaze Effect
Design a Triangular Pottery Plate Block Mold in Fusion 360
Designing a Jigger Mold for a Bowl Using Fusion 360 CAD
Downloading and 3D-Printing a 3MF file
Draw a propeller in Fusion 360 for use on an overhead propeller mixer
Drawing a Mug Handle Mold in Fusion 360
Drawing a Mug Mold Using OnShape CAD
Enter a Recipe Into Insight-live
Entering TestData Into Insight-Live
Fine tune the thixotropy of a glaze or engobe slurry
Getting Frustrated With a 55% Gerstley Borate Glaze
How I Developed the G2926B Cone 6 Transparent Base Glaze
How I Formulated G2934 Cone 6 Silky MgO Matte Glaze Using Insight-Live
How to Apply a White Slip to Terra Cotta Ware
How to Paste a Recipe Into Insight-live
Importing Data into Insight-live
Importing Desktop Insight Recipes to Insight-live
Importing Generic CSV Recipe Data into Insight-Live
Insight-Live Meets a Silica Deprived Glaze Recipe
Insight-Live Quick Tour
Liner Glazing a Stoneware Mug
Make a precision plaster mold for slip casting using Fusion 360 and 3D Printing
Making ceramic glaze flow test balls
Making test bars for the SHAB, LDW and DFAC tests
Manually program your kiln or suffer glaze defects!
Mica and Feldspar Mine of MGK Minerals
Predicting Glaze Durability by Chemistry in Insight-Live
Preparing Pictures for Insight-live
Replace Lithium Carbonate With Lithium Frit Using Insight-Live
Replacing 10% Gerstley Borate in a clear glaze
Same Beer Bottle Mold Using Fusion 360 and OnShape CAD
Signing Up at Insight-live.com
Signing-In at Insight-live.com
Slip cast a stoneware beer bottle
Substitute Ferro Frit 3134 For Another Frit
Substituting Custer Feldspar for Another in a Cone 10R Glaze Recipe
Thixotropy and How to Gel a Ceramic Glaze
Use Insight-live to substitute materials in a recipe
Watch Thixotropy Happen With a 20kg Batch of Dipping Glaze
3D Printing a Clay Cookie Cutter-Stamper
Create a clay cookie cutter by exporting a vector image from Illustrator into Fusion 360, adding width to lines and extruding them to form the cutter, stamp and base
Click here
to watch this at youtube.com
 or
click here
to go to our Youtube channel
Transcript/Notes
This is a great way to make crests and designs for
ceramics
and pottery, enabling you to take on production contracts to put company logos on to ware. Using standard illustration software to create the designs enables more detail and more faithful reproduction. This may be a much better choice than
letterpress
plates in your application because these
cookie cutters
can both stamp and cut the clay at the same time. In addition, clay rolled very thin does not release well from letterpress plates - but this method is perfect. Foremost, you can make these yourself using any inexpensive
3D printer
.
Vector illustration program: Adobe Illustrator is the standard but it is pricey. There are alternatives that can create SVG files. Inkscape is excellent, it's multi-platform, free and open source and its native format is SVG. Excellent apps are now available on iPad (Autodesk Graphic and Vectornator are examples).
3D
Parametric
CAD
program:
Fusion 360
is state-of-the-art and pricey but it is available free to hobbyists and students. FreeCAD is open source, free and multi-platform, but it is more difficult to learn. There are many other commercial packages, and all of them have similar user interfaces to Fusion 360. And tablets are now capable CAD devices, the Shapr app is a good example.
more..
Links
URLs
https://inkscape.org
Inkscape - 2D illustration cross-platform software
Enables creating and editing 2D graphics and saving them in SVG format. Free and open-source, multi-platform, a
mature
and very capable alternative to Adobe Illustrator, the industry standard.
URLs
https://www.adobe.com/ca/products/illustrator.html
Adobe Illustrator - The industry standard in 2D vector graphics
Adobe Illustrator is a vector graphics editor and design program developed and marketed by Adobe Inc. The development of Adobe Illustrator began in 1985 on the Apple Macintosh and moved to usability on Windows by 1993. No artist or crafts person should be without 2D illustration skills and this is the industry standard worldwide.
URLs
https://www.autodesk.ca/en/products/fusion-360
Fusion 360
Parametric
3D
CAD
software
This is incredibly powerful software that available to anyone with a moderately powerful PC or Mac. Engineer, design, and create anything in 3D. Although a challenge to learn, the abilities that this provides can revolutionize any ceramic production effort.
URLs
https://www.freecadweb.org
FreeCAD
parametric
CAD
software
An open-source
parametric
3D modeller. FreeCAD is maturing more slowly than commercial products but is still very capable. It is useful for
3D printing
things designed in other products (e.g. Nomad for iPad).
URLs
https://www.shapr3d.com
Shapr 3D
Parametric
CAD
modelling software
The full power of Shapr3D is on Windows PCs and tablets, Macs, and iPads using the input methods like Apple Pencil, SpaceMouse, Wacom pen tablets, or keyboard and mouse. It runs on top of the ParaSolid engine that is the power behind
SolidWorks
.
Glossary
3D-Printing
Standard
3D printing
technology (not printing with clay itself) is very useful to potters and ceramic industry in making objects that assist and enable production.
Glossary
3D Slicer
A slicer
is software that can cut a
3MF
,
OBJ
or
STL
3D model file into hundreds or even thousands of layers  and then control a printer to print them layer-by-layer.
Projects
Cookie Cutting clay with 3D printed cutters
We are finding more and more applications for this simple process of cookie-cutting shapes in
ceramics
. You won't believe whats possible and how easy it is to get started.
Letterpress plates from BoxcarPress.com. Great for DIY stamping.
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
We find the 0.047 relief depth shown here is best (K152), especially when pigment is used to highlight the recesses. It can be valuable to put a border around the outside so edges do not smear outward when pressing. These flexible plates do not need to be stuck to a piece of wood, just lay them face down on the clay and use a wooden block to press them down. When the clay is stiff enough no parting agent is needed. The cost: In 2024 the minimum charge is $37.5 for 50 square inches. They have an highly streamlined checkout that accepts
PDF
and
AI
vector files. The cart might generate all four CMYK plates, remove the CMY ones and keep the K (black). The most common mistake is having too much detail or too small printing. Or, forgetting to make them reverse-reading. It is best to make your images using vector graphic software like Illustrator, Inkscape, CorelDraw, etc.
Video: Create a cookie cutter/stamper in 3D software, print it and use it
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
This
cookie cutter
can both cut and stamp the piece (notice the 3D render in the centre, the logo is 2mm lower than the cutter around the outside). We make them by rolling a slab to 3.2mm (1/8in) thick, applying stretch wrap over it and then pressing the cutter/stamper into it (using a wood block). Then just peel away the plastic and the outer waste clay and a perfect crest is left. This method enables using clay of almost any stiffness. We find that softer clay works best, just peel it up from the board, apply slip to the back, position it on the side of the
leather hard
ware and press it down (from the centre outwards). On the lower right is a crested mug that has just been glazed. Upper right is a crest that has been glazed and fired. About the cookie cutter: We create them with
0.8mm
wall thickness (twice the width of the
0.4mm
extruder on the
3D printer
). We export the vector image (made in Illustrator) into
Fusion 360
and then add elements to stabilize and hold the profile in place. This cutter is 8mm tall, and the stamp lines are 5mm tall. The crest is 52mm (2 in) wide. This whole process may sound a little intimidating to you - but we are working on a step-by-step video.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy