Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Media
3D Print a Test of the Beer Bottle Neck
3D Printing a Clay Cookie Cutter-Stamper
A 3-minute Mug with Plainsman Polar Ice
A Broken Glaze Meets Insight-Live and a Magic Material
Accessing Recipes from "Mid-Fire Glazes" book in Insight-Live
Adjusting the Thixotropy of an Engobe for Pottery
Analysing a Crazing, Cutlery-marking Glaze Using Insight-Live
Compare the Chemistry of Recipes Using Insight-Live
Connecting an External Image to Insight-Live Pictures
Converting G1214M Cone 6 transparent glaze to G1214Z matte
Create a Synthetic Feldspar in Insight-Live
Creating a Cone 6 Oil-Spot Overglaze Effect
Design a Triangular Pottery Plate Block Mold in Fusion 360
Designing a Jigger Mold for a Bowl Using Fusion 360 CAD
Downloading and 3D-Printing a 3MF file
Draw a propeller in Fusion 360 for use on an overhead propeller mixer
Drawing a Mug Handle Mold in Fusion 360
Drawing a Mug Mold Using OnShape CAD
Enter a Recipe Into Insight-live
Entering TestData Into Insight-Live
Fine tune the thixotropy of a glaze or engobe slurry
Getting Frustrated With a 55% Gerstley Borate Glaze
How I Developed the G2926B Cone 6 Transparent Base Glaze
How I Formulated G2934 Cone 6 Silky MgO Matte Glaze Using Insight-Live
How to Apply a White Slip to Terra Cotta Ware
How to Paste a Recipe Into Insight-live
Importing Data into Insight-live
Importing Desktop Insight Recipes to Insight-live
Importing Generic CSV Recipe Data into Insight-Live
Insight-Live Meets a Silica Deprived Glaze Recipe
Insight-Live Quick Tour
Liner Glazing a Stoneware Mug
Make a precision plaster mold for slip casting using Fusion 360 and 3D Printing
Making ceramic glaze flow test balls
Making test bars for the SHAB, LDW and DFAC tests
Manually program your kiln or suffer glaze defects!
Mica and Feldspar Mine of MGK Minerals
Predicting Glaze Durability by Chemistry in Insight-Live
Preparing Pictures for Insight-live
Replace Lithium Carbonate With Lithium Frit Using Insight-Live
Replacing 10% Gerstley Borate in a clear glaze
Same Beer Bottle Mold Using Fusion 360 and OnShape CAD
Signing Up at Insight-live.com
Signing-In at Insight-live.com
Slip cast a stoneware beer bottle
Substitute Ferro Frit 3134 For Another Frit
Substituting Custer Feldspar for Another in a Cone 10R Glaze Recipe
Thixotropy and How to Gel a Ceramic Glaze
Use Insight-live to substitute materials in a recipe
Watch Thixotropy Happen With a 20kg Batch of Dipping Glaze
3D Print a Test of the Beer Bottle Neck
In 4 minutes you will learn how to modify a copy of the existing drawing to print only a narrower part of the top 8cm
You can also watch this at
Screencast-o-matic.com
Transcript/Notes
Steps:
-Save the file under a temporary name.
-Push down the outer shell to get it out of the way.
-Edit the sketch and draw a 6x8cm box at the top, offset it twice outwards
0.8mm
each.
-Draw another line across the bottom of the box 5mm up. Save the sketch.
more..
-Go home, make the sketch visible.
-Select the inner shell and extrude it upwards 2cm (edit the extrude and set the operation at 'Join').
-Select the outer shell, set the operation at but and extrude it up and down (verify there is air space all around it).
-Using the 'Cut' operation to extrude the 5cm section upwards, fillet its bottom edges.
-Select it and
3D print
it.
Links
Projects
Beer Bottle Master Mold via 3D Printing
A project that took several years of failures and blind allies and is finally coming together - so much simpler than expected!
Calibrating the fit for the swing stopper assembly
Three iterations to derive the measurements
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
There is no substitute for firing tests pieces to
cone 6
to test the fit for the swing assembly. In
Fusion 360
I sliced off the top of the bottle and formed a small box around it to be able to quickly
3D print
a test
case mold
of just the upper neck (I cast two
plaster
mold halves from them). In the freshly cast
leather hard
pieces, making a hole in the middle of the lug mounts was easy. Although the wire is 2.8mm dia, testing cycles indicated that an 11/64" (4.3mm) drill bit is required. Simply twisting it to create a hole in the center takes seconds. After two more iterations, I ended up with a pad size at 10x10mm and the flat pad surface at 18mm from center. Of course, your
casting body
may shrink more or less than mine, so be ready to adjust these values.
The link below links to a step-by-step in Fusion 360 of how to save a temporary copy of the mold drawing and modify it to isolate just the top portion of the neck.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy