Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Media
3D Print a Test of the Beer Bottle Neck
3D Printing a Clay Cookie Cutter-Stamper
A 3-minute Mug with Plainsman Polar Ice
A Broken Glaze Meets Insight-Live and a Magic Material
Accessing Recipes from "Mid-Fire Glazes" book in Insight-Live
Adjusting the Thixotropy of an Engobe for Pottery
Analysing a Crazing, Cutlery-marking Glaze Using Insight-Live
Compare the Chemistry of Recipes Using Insight-Live
Connecting an External Image to Insight-Live Pictures
Converting G1214M Cone 6 transparent glaze to G1214Z matte
Create a Synthetic Feldspar in Insight-Live
Creating a Cone 6 Oil-Spot Overglaze Effect
Design a Triangular Pottery Plate Block Mold in Fusion 360
Designing a Jigger Mold for a Bowl Using Fusion 360 CAD
Downloading and 3D-Printing a 3MF file
Draw a propeller in Fusion 360 for use on an overhead propeller mixer
Drawing a Mug Handle Mold in Fusion 360
Drawing a Mug Mold Using OnShape CAD
Enter a Recipe Into Insight-live
Entering TestData Into Insight-Live
Fine tune the thixotropy of a glaze or engobe slurry
Getting Frustrated With a 55% Gerstley Borate Glaze
How I Developed the G2926B Cone 6 Transparent Base Glaze
How I Formulated G2934 Cone 6 Silky MgO Matte Glaze Using Insight-Live
How to Apply a White Slip to Terra Cotta Ware
How to Paste a Recipe Into Insight-live
Importing Data into Insight-live
Importing Desktop Insight Recipes to Insight-live
Importing Generic CSV Recipe Data into Insight-Live
Insight-Live Meets a Silica Deprived Glaze Recipe
Insight-Live Quick Tour
Liner Glazing a Stoneware Mug
Make a precision plaster mold for slip casting using Fusion 360 and 3D Printing
Making ceramic glaze flow test balls
Making test bars for the SHAB, LDW and DFAC tests
Manually program your kiln or suffer glaze defects!
Mica and Feldspar Mine of MGK Minerals
Predicting Glaze Durability by Chemistry in Insight-Live
Preparing Pictures for Insight-live
Replace Lithium Carbonate With Lithium Frit Using Insight-Live
Replacing 10% Gerstley Borate in a clear glaze
Same Beer Bottle Mold Using Fusion 360 and OnShape CAD
Signing Up at Insight-live.com
Signing-In at Insight-live.com
Slip cast a stoneware beer bottle
Substitute Ferro Frit 3134 For Another Frit
Substituting Custer Feldspar for Another in a Cone 10R Glaze Recipe
Thixotropy and How to Gel a Ceramic Glaze
Use Insight-live to substitute materials in a recipe
Watch Thixotropy Happen With a 20kg Batch of Dipping Glaze
Drawing a Mug Handle Mold in Fusion 360
Lilly will take you step-by-step through the process of drawing a shell mold that can be 3D printed and used to cast a plaster mold for slip casting perfect-fitting handles.
Your browser does not support MP4 video.
Transcript/Notes
1
You are looking at the two halves of a mold.
Plaster
is poured into these to make a working mold for
slip casting
a handle that precisely fits the side contour of a mug. But it could also be a teapot or a pitcher.
Let me show you how flexible this can be in
Fusion 360
. I have parameters set up for the diameters of rim and foot. Changing these automatically changes the 3D model shape.
I can also change the shape of the mug or handle in the main sketch and the 3D model will adjust.
2
more..
Here is the sketch again (without dimensions and points). A priority was keeping the number of steps to a minimum while still having enough
parametric
functionality to adapt a handle to a wide range of shapes and sizes. A number of details are important.
-The initial drawing has most of the complexity. It is important for the profile and box to be on the same sketch since they interrelate so much.
-Certain lines are offsets, they must follow their parent lines, I don’t do anything to break the link.
-The curve describing the mug contour was drawn with the spline tool, the others were offset, then its endpoints were joined to the horizontals.
-At least one of the handle endpoints must cross the box.
-The 13.5mm holes fit our
natch system
.
-It’s tempting to bevel some corners, but don’t do that here. Do it later in 3D.
3
Let’s trace the steps on the timeline. I will describe them conceptually so you can do this in any
CAD
product.
First, I created the initial sketch on the YZ plane. Then I created two planes perpendicular to the ends of the handle center line and then sketched the oval cross section on each (with
0.8mm
insets).
4
I then extruded the 0.8mm walls of the box upward by 20 mm, and the bottom downward by 0.8 mm (excluding the holes for the
natch clips
).
5
Next, I revolved part of the 0.8mm thick part of the contour 35 degrees (using the join operation). This creates a mold wall that exactly matches the outer curvature of the mug.
6
Next, I lofted between the two cross-section profiles. I did this along the handle centerline (first solid and then using the center circle to hollow it).
7
To remove the unneeded part of the box I revolved the inner mug profile using the cut operation.
8
I then split the body front and back of the box (using its rim and base as the cutter).  Then I removed the unneeded parts.
9
Next, I made the slip spares using the 2mm wide part of the curves (the horizontal lines define the bottom and top). I revolved by 20 degrees, in both directions, to create two new bodies, and then pulled these away 20 centimetres.
10
With the camera is in orthographic mode, I drew two ovals on the XZ plane (with 1.2 mm insets).
Next, I extruded the pipes to join with the mounts and then hollowed the centers.
11
Next, I bevelled the handle joins (inside and outside). The outside bevel keeps the wall thickness consistent, that eases mold release.
12
Finally, I beveled the top and bottom sharp corners (inside and outside). This helps prevent breaking the otherwise delicate plaster corners.
13
To finish it is just a matter mirroring this,
3D printing
both, inserting the clip and embed pairs in the holes, filling them with plaster and using a
heat gun
to remove the print after the plaster has set.
CAD drawing of mug handle block mold (spareless)
Available
on the
Downloads
page
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
I have long wanted an easy way to make molds for slipcasting handles that mate perfectly to specifically shaped and sized mugs (or pitchers, teapots, etc). These are the answer. These shells print quickly to only 11 grams of
PLA
filament. They peel away from the set
plaster
with a
heat gun
to give fine detail and a perfect fit. These use
3D-printed
pour spouts
instead of a
mold spare
(printed separately) and enable cutting the joint surface cleanly and accurately before the handle is removed from the mold (a version of this is also available with spares). This is the product of a long development process. This drawing is available on the
downloads page
.
Worried about mixing or tuning your own
casting slip
recipe? We have lots of help on doing that. As motivation, consider the benefits of mass producing handles and store them in a wet box with the attachment slip.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy