Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Media
3D Print a Test of the Beer Bottle Neck
3D Printing a Clay Cookie Cutter-Stamper
A 3-minute Mug with Plainsman Polar Ice
A Broken Glaze Meets Insight-Live and a Magic Material
Accessing Recipes from "Mid-Fire Glazes" book in Insight-Live
Adjusting the Thixotropy of an Engobe for Pottery
Analysing a Crazing, Cutlery-marking Glaze Using Insight-Live
Compare the Chemistry of Recipes Using Insight-Live
Connecting an External Image to Insight-Live Pictures
Converting G1214M Cone 6 transparent glaze to G1214Z matte
Create a Synthetic Feldspar in Insight-Live
Creating a Cone 6 Oil-Spot Overglaze Effect
Design a Triangular Pottery Plate Block Mold in Fusion 360
Designing a Jigger Mold for a Bowl Using Fusion 360 CAD
Downloading and 3D-Printing a 3MF file
Draw a propeller in Fusion 360 for use on an overhead propeller mixer
Drawing a Mug Handle Mold in Fusion 360
Drawing a Mug Mold Using OnShape CAD
Enter a Recipe Into Insight-live
Entering TestData Into Insight-Live
Fine tune the thixotropy of a glaze or engobe slurry
Getting Frustrated With a 55% Gerstley Borate Glaze
How I Developed the G2926B Cone 6 Transparent Base Glaze
How I Formulated G2934 Cone 6 Silky MgO Matte Glaze Using Insight-Live
How to Apply a White Slip to Terra Cotta Ware
How to Paste a Recipe Into Insight-live
Importing Data into Insight-live
Importing Desktop Insight Recipes to Insight-live
Importing Generic CSV Recipe Data into Insight-Live
Insight-Live Meets a Silica Deprived Glaze Recipe
Insight-Live Quick Tour
Liner Glazing a Stoneware Mug
Make a precision plaster mold for slip casting using Fusion 360 and 3D Printing
Making ceramic glaze flow test balls
Making test bars for the SHAB, LDW and DFAC tests
Manually program your kiln or suffer glaze defects!
Mica and Feldspar Mine of MGK Minerals
Predicting Glaze Durability by Chemistry in Insight-Live
Preparing Pictures for Insight-live
Replace Lithium Carbonate With Lithium Frit Using Insight-Live
Replacing 10% Gerstley Borate in a clear glaze
Same Beer Bottle Mold Using Fusion 360 and OnShape CAD
Signing Up at Insight-live.com
Signing-In at Insight-live.com
Slip cast a stoneware beer bottle
Substitute Ferro Frit 3134 For Another Frit
Substituting Custer Feldspar for Another in a Cone 10R Glaze Recipe
Thixotropy and How to Gel a Ceramic Glaze
Use Insight-live to substitute materials in a recipe
Watch Thixotropy Happen With a 20kg Batch of Dipping Glaze
Downloading and 3D-Printing a 3MF file
Simplify3D, Prusa Slicer and Creality Print opening three different 3MF models digitalfire.com. Rotating, panning, zooming, duplicating, mirroring, place-on-face, positioning, slice-previewing, infill, support and overhang threshhold, brimming, generating a G-Code file for printing and printing direct.
Click here
to watch this at youtube.com
 or
click here
to go to our Youtube channel
Transcript/Notes
Our wish is that this video removes a few barriers that might have been preventing you from investigating the use of
3D design
and printing in your ceramic practice. Don’t miss out on the potential by being overwhelmed; just take it a step at a time, solving each obstacle in your path as it arises.
1
A "Slicer" is, as its name suggests, an app that slices up a virtual object so a
3D printer
can print it layer-by-layer. This is a
3MF
format file of a "
Case Mold
" for a handle. It was created by "
Cad
design" software Fusion three sixty. The 3MF format has many advantages over traditional
STL files
. I'll open this one in "Simplify3D", it is a paid special purpose slicer. Like others that come free with 3D printer hardware, it can rotate, zoom and pan using the mouse. And, it can dissect, combine and resize objects. Here is an example of how it can duplicate and reflect an object. If you use this slicer you likely won't need any further instruction.
more..
2
Let’s use Prusa slicer to open the 3D model of a
melt fluidity tester
that I have downloaded. There are some details to be careful about.
First, I’ll make sure support is turned on and the “overhang threshold” is set to 35 degrees (printers these days can handle extreme overhangs). Now, let’s go to Preview. Support is being generated in front - even though this was drawn with a 37-degree angle to avoid it.
3
Second, there is a problem at the back. It is not sitting flat on the bed. In "Editor mode", I’ll use the “Place on Face” tool to fix that. Now, let's go back to Preview to reslice it.
That has fixed both issues. Back in Edit mode, I’ll press Escape to turn off the Placer tool.
Third, let's go to Preview mode and move this slider.
Notice that
infill
is being generated. But it is not needed. Let’s turn it off in the print settings by changing the fill density to zero. After re-slicing, it is hollow and ready to print.
4
After making sure I have the right printer configuration selected I’ll choose "Export" from the File menu. Using the "Export
G-code
" option I'll give the file a name, and save.
There are many ways to send this to the printer. The most basic is to copy the file to a memory stick and insert that into the printer. Later you can learn to use your slicer's ability to connect to your printer directly over WiFi.
5
Now let’s open a file that contains multiple objects. Notice it asks me how I want to open it. I’ll tell it I want the 3D models. Then it asks if I want to load all the objects as one, I’ll answer no.
I obviously cannot print all of these at once. To "unselect all" in this slicer I shift-click outside of them. Now, I can proceed as before, positioning each object on the bed, orienting it and configuring the
infill and support
.
This object is hollow and open, with no extreme overhangs. So
the slicer
realizes that it does not need to
print support
.
However there are a couple of new issues with the other two:
For example, look under this object: Notice it does need support. I’ll move it to the print bed and go to Preview mode to ensure the slicer does realize this need.
This object has a special need - a brim. That is because its area of contact with the print bed is inadequate, it could release during printing. I’ll set a brim at 3mm wide outside and enter a zero separation gap to make sure it holds on well.
The preview ensures that it is working.
6
Other popular printer brands have their own slicers. This is "Creality Print".
Its "Prepare Panel" corresponds to the Prusa Editor Panel. It also has a Lay-on-Face tool.
Rotating and panning have different mouse-key combinations than Prusa slicer.
The controls we already talked about are here on the right.
Support panel-four has the checkbox to enable and disable support.
Strength panel-two is where you find Infill settings.
Other Settings panel-five, under "Bed adhesion", is where you choose the "brim type".
This slicer enables these settings to be global or just for the selected object. For example, I can print these two at the same time, turning on a brim for this one, but not this one.
While this slicer can export to a G-Code file, its Device Panel can be used to connect a printer, initiate a print and monitor it with data and camera. Most other systems have similar functionality.
3MF vs STL vs OBJ files for 3D printing
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Shown here are Creality Slicer, Prusa Slicer and Simplify 3D. Each of these can import
STL
,
OBJ
and
3MF
files. Each permits resizing, rotating, reflecting and duplicating individual items and can efficiently place and space multiple items and groups. Each saves or exports as 3MF files. On the right is the
Fusion 360
print dialog where I can choose which slicer and which format to send.
OBJ
files were introduced in 1980 for visual rendering (e.g. animation, gaming, special effects). Files store surface geometry as interconnected triangles and define surface textures, materials and colors. These features were overkill for early
3D printers
.
STL
(Stereolithography) files were developed in 1987 by 3D Systems specifically for
CAD
and
3D printing
, having a single focus on geometry. They were simple and computationally efficient (and also unitless like OBJ, assuming mm). STLs permitted only one object. They dominated early 3D printing processes (
FDM
,
SLA
,
SLS
), where color or texture was irrelevant and provided a simple standard for industry growth. However, modern printers can now do color, texture and multi-material, thus...
3MF
(3D Manufacturing Format) files were introduced in 2015 specifically for more advanced 3D printing. To OBJ they add object orientation, units, printing instructions and meta information. Objects in 3MF files can be manipulated separately in
the slicer
.
All three formats are generated by modern CAD software (for handoff to
a slicer
app). 3MF is the preferred one.
On-Ramp to 3D-Printing Molds:
Download and print something as a first step.
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
3D design
and printing is so valuable in
ceramics
that we can't stop pushing it. Here is how one goes about
3D printing
a
3MF
model file downloaded from this site. Why 3MF? Unlike the much older
STL
format, it enables multiple objects, units of measure and meta information. If you are on the page hosting this image, there is a link to the five-minute tutorial video at the bottom (otherwise click the image).
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy