Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Media
3D Print a Test of the Beer Bottle Neck
3D Printing a Clay Cookie Cutter-Stamper
A 3-minute Mug with Plainsman Polar Ice
A Broken Glaze Meets Insight-Live and a Magic Material
Accessing Recipes from "Mid-Fire Glazes" book in Insight-Live
Adjusting the Thixotropy of an Engobe for Pottery
Analysing a Crazing, Cutlery-marking Glaze Using Insight-Live
Compare the Chemistry of Recipes Using Insight-Live
Connecting an External Image to Insight-Live Pictures
Converting G1214M Cone 6 transparent glaze to G1214Z matte
Create a Synthetic Feldspar in Insight-Live
Creating a Cone 6 Oil-Spot Overglaze Effect
Design a Triangular Pottery Plate Block Mold in Fusion 360
Designing a Jigger Mold for a Bowl Using Fusion 360 CAD
Downloading and 3D-Printing a 3MF file
Draw a propeller in Fusion 360 for use on an overhead propeller mixer
Drawing a Mug Handle Mold in Fusion 360
Drawing a Mug Mold Using OnShape CAD
Enter a Recipe Into Insight-live
Entering TestData Into Insight-Live
Fine tune the thixotropy of a glaze or engobe slurry
Getting Frustrated With a 55% Gerstley Borate Glaze
How I Developed the G2926B Cone 6 Transparent Base Glaze
How I Formulated G2934 Cone 6 Silky MgO Matte Glaze Using Insight-Live
How to Apply a White Slip to Terra Cotta Ware
How to Paste a Recipe Into Insight-live
Importing Data into Insight-live
Importing Desktop Insight Recipes to Insight-live
Importing Generic CSV Recipe Data into Insight-Live
Insight-Live Meets a Silica Deprived Glaze Recipe
Insight-Live Quick Tour
Liner Glazing a Stoneware Mug
Make a precision plaster mold for slip casting using Fusion 360 and 3D Printing
Making ceramic glaze flow test balls
Making test bars for the SHAB, LDW and DFAC tests
Manually program your kiln or suffer glaze defects!
Mica and Feldspar Mine of MGK Minerals
Predicting Glaze Durability by Chemistry in Insight-Live
Preparing Pictures for Insight-live
Replace Lithium Carbonate With Lithium Frit Using Insight-Live
Replacing 10% Gerstley Borate in a clear glaze
Same Beer Bottle Mold Using Fusion 360 and OnShape CAD
Signing Up at Insight-live.com
Signing-In at Insight-live.com
Slip cast a stoneware beer bottle
Substitute Ferro Frit 3134 For Another Frit
Substituting Custer Feldspar for Another in a Cone 10R Glaze Recipe
Thixotropy and How to Gel a Ceramic Glaze
Use Insight-live to substitute materials in a recipe
Watch Thixotropy Happen With a 20kg Batch of Dipping Glaze
Making test bars for the SHAB, LDW and DFAC tests
We will make bars of a clay body for the SHAB test (for shrinkage and absorption), a specimen for weighing wet, dry and then fired (to get water content and LOI) and a drying disk to measure drying performance and soluble salt content.
Your browser does not support MP4 video.
Transcript/Notes
1
I'm going to demonstrate how to make our standard shrinkage absorption test bars from a plastic clay sample.
Rather than being a standardized test to produce absolute results, this is about simply doing things the same way each time to be able to make comparative tests of your own clays and
clay bodies
.
Start by cutting off about a kilogram of clay, and wedge it well with no air bubbles and no
laminations
. Then begin the flattening process in your preferred way - flatten it down to about twice as thick as needed.
Next, finish with a rolling pin. But rather than rolling it right down, repeat a cycle of rolling and turning it over. To get the right thickness use two 3/8" metal rods.
more..
2
To cut to size use thin plywood boards (these are 4 1/4" wide). The bars are not disturbed after cutting, they are dried on these boards.
Cut each bar to 2.5cm, or 1" wide. Make bars for each temperature you intend to test for - at a minimum the target temperature and one cone above and below.
Stamp each bar with the
code number
assigned to the recipe in
Insight-live
and a specimen number (typically this is a single digit that matches the cone number). Finally, press a 10-centimeter mark using a length marker. We find that dipping it in talcum powder between each bar ensures a crisp mark each time.
3
For measuring the
water content
and the loss on ignition, cut a smaller sample, typically the same width as the bars, and 1 1/2" long. Round the edges, stamp the code number, weigh it and write that onto it using a needle tool.
Next, make a drying factor disk. Re-wedge the clay and flatten it as before - but this time roll it to 3/16". Like before, use metal guide rods to get the exact thickness.
Notice the wooden rolling pin - we find these don't stick as much as rubber or plastic ones.
This particular clay is quite sticky, so I have to be careful.
To cut the disk, we use a compass set at 6cm, thus getting a 12cm diameter disc.
Finally, put that on the board, stamp the same code number on it and place a plaster-filled can in the center.
The board is now ready to be put into the
dehydrator
.
Links
Tests
Shrinkage/Absorption Test
SHAB Shrinkage and absorption test procedure for plastic
clay bodies
and materials
Articles
Setting up a Clay Testing Program in Your Company or Studio
Set up a routine testing pipeline and start generating historical data that will enable your staff to understand your source materials and maintain, adjust and troubleshoot your
clay body
recipes.
Video: Making SHAB, DFAC, LDW clay body test bars
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
One-minute video. It demonstrates how to make the test bars for measuring plastic
clay body
(or clay material) drying and
firing shrinkage
, fired absorption, a bar for measuring
water content
and loss-on-ignition and a disk for measuring
drying performance
and
soluble salts
content. This method requires no expensive equipment and is within the reach of any technician.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy