Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Media
3D Print a Test of the Beer Bottle Neck
3D Printing a Clay Cookie Cutter-Stamper
A 3-minute Mug with Plainsman Polar Ice
A Broken Glaze Meets Insight-Live and a Magic Material
Accessing Recipes from "Mid-Fire Glazes" book in Insight-Live
Adjusting the Thixotropy of an Engobe for Pottery
Analysing a Crazing, Cutlery-marking Glaze Using Insight-Live
Compare the Chemistry of Recipes Using Insight-Live
Connecting an External Image to Insight-Live Pictures
Converting G1214M Cone 6 transparent glaze to G1214Z matte
Create a Synthetic Feldspar in Insight-Live
Creating a Cone 6 Oil-Spot Overglaze Effect
Design a Triangular Pottery Plate Block Mold in Fusion 360
Designing a Jigger Mold for a Bowl Using Fusion 360 CAD
Downloading and 3D-Printing a 3MF file
Draw a propeller in Fusion 360 for use on an overhead propeller mixer
Drawing a Mug Handle Mold in Fusion 360
Drawing a Mug Mold Using OnShape CAD
Enter a Recipe Into Insight-live
Entering TestData Into Insight-Live
Fine tune the thixotropy of a glaze or engobe slurry
Getting Frustrated With a 55% Gerstley Borate Glaze
How I Developed the G2926B Cone 6 Transparent Base Glaze
How I Formulated G2934 Cone 6 Silky MgO Matte Glaze Using Insight-Live
How to Apply a White Slip to Terra Cotta Ware
How to Paste a Recipe Into Insight-live
Importing Data into Insight-live
Importing Desktop Insight Recipes to Insight-live
Importing Generic CSV Recipe Data into Insight-Live
Insight-Live Meets a Silica Deprived Glaze Recipe
Insight-Live Quick Tour
Liner Glazing a Stoneware Mug
Make a precision plaster mold for slip casting using Fusion 360 and 3D Printing
Making ceramic glaze flow test balls
Making test bars for the SHAB, LDW and DFAC tests
Manually program your kiln or suffer glaze defects!
Mica and Feldspar Mine of MGK Minerals
Predicting Glaze Durability by Chemistry in Insight-Live
Preparing Pictures for Insight-live
Replace Lithium Carbonate With Lithium Frit Using Insight-Live
Replacing 10% Gerstley Borate in a clear glaze
Same Beer Bottle Mold Using Fusion 360 and OnShape CAD
Signing Up at Insight-live.com
Signing-In at Insight-live.com
Slip cast a stoneware beer bottle
Substitute Ferro Frit 3134 For Another Frit
Substituting Custer Feldspar for Another in a Cone 10R Glaze Recipe
Thixotropy and How to Gel a Ceramic Glaze
Use Insight-live to substitute materials in a recipe
Watch Thixotropy Happen With a 20kg Batch of Dipping Glaze
Watch Thixotropy Happen With a 20kg Batch of Dipping Glaze
I mixed 20kg of glaze powder into 20kg of water, turned out super watery. Yet the specific gravity was 1.46, too high. How? But, instead of more water, I added Epsom salts—and boom: A perfect thixotropic gel. It glides on smooth, no drips, no thickness issues.
Your browser does not support MP4 video.
Transcript/Notes
In this video, I mix 20kg of glaze powder into 20kg of water using our powerful
propeller mixer
. The resulting
slurry
is like water, absolutely unusable. Yet on measuring the
specific gravity
(using a hydrometer because it floats freely) I find that it is too high, I actually have to add more water! How is that even possible? Instead, I add
Epsom salts
and mix again and the slurry gels and hangs on in a perfectly even layer when I dip the spatula. This is a
thixotropic
gel, it will apply evenly to
bisque
ware yet not go on too thickly. We normally recommend a specific gravity of 1.44 for this glaze, but in this case, it seemed watery enough at 1.46 (on use, it will become clear if 1.46 is OK e.g. if it goes onto the ware too thick). If that happens I'll just add water to 1.44 (and more Epson salts if needed). Based on online pricing at this time, coverage is minimum six times and as much as twenty times less expensive than buying jars of transparent
brushing glaze
(considering both the total powder weight and the specific gravity difference between this and
commercial glazes
we use).
more..
Links
Materials
Epsom Salts
Glossary
Thixotropy
Thixotropy
is a property of ceramic slurries of high
water content
.
Thixotropic
suspensions flow when moving but gel after sitting (for a few moments more depending on application). This phenomenon is helpful in getting even, drip-free glaze coverage.
Pure feldspar applied as a glaze: Possible because of the magic of thixotropy.
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
These are pure
Custer feldspar
and
Nepheline Syenite
. The coverage is perfectly even on both. No drips. Yet no clay is present. The secret?
Epsom salts
. I
slurried
the two powders in water until the flow was like heavy cream. I added more water to thin and then started adding the Epsom salts (powdered). After only a pinch or two, they both gelled. Then I added more water and more Epsom salts until they thickened again and gelled even better. The result is a
thixotropic
slurry
. They both applied beautifully to these porcelains. The gelled consistency prevented them from
settling
in seconds to a hard layer on the bucket bottom. Could you do this with pure
silica
? Yes! The lesson: If these will suspend by gelling with Epsom salts, then any glaze will. You never need to tolerate settling or uneven coverage for single-layer dip-glazing again!
See the magic of thixotropy as I mix a 20kg batch of G2926B glaze
Your browser does not support MP4 video.
In this video, I mix 20kg of
G2926B
glaze powder into 20kg of water using our powerful
propeller mixer
. The resulting
slurry
is like water, absolutely unusable. Yet on measuring the
specific gravity
(using a hydrometer because it floats freely) I find that it is too high, I actually have to add more water! How is that even possible? Instead, I add
Epsom salts
and mix again and the slurry gels and hangs on in a perfectly even layer when I dip the spatula. This is a
thixotropic
gel, it will apply evenly to
bisque
ware yet not go on too thickly. We normally recommend a specific gravity of 1.44 for this glaze, but in this case, it seemed watery enough at 1.46 (on use, it will become clear if 1.46 is OK e.g. if it goes onto the ware too thick). If that happens I'll just add water to 1.44 (and more Epson salts if needed). Based on online pricing at this time, coverage is minimum six times and as much as twenty times less expensive than buying jars of transparent
brushing glaze
(considering both the total powder weight and the specific gravity difference between this and
commercial glazes
we use).
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy