Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Media
3D Print a Test of the Beer Bottle Neck
3D Printing a Clay Cookie Cutter-Stamper
A 3-minute Mug with Plainsman Polar Ice
A Broken Glaze Meets Insight-Live and a Magic Material
Accessing Recipes from "Mid-Fire Glazes" book in Insight-Live
Adjusting the Thixotropy of an Engobe for Pottery
Analysing a Crazing, Cutlery-marking Glaze Using Insight-Live
Compare the Chemistry of Recipes Using Insight-Live
Connecting an External Image to Insight-Live Pictures
Converting G1214M Cone 6 transparent glaze to G1214Z matte
Create a Synthetic Feldspar in Insight-Live
Creating a Cone 6 Oil-Spot Overglaze Effect
Design a Triangular Pottery Plate Block Mold in Fusion 360
Designing a Jigger Mold for a Bowl Using Fusion 360 CAD
Downloading and 3D-Printing a 3MF file
Draw a propeller in Fusion 360 for use on an overhead propeller mixer
Drawing a Mug Handle Mold in Fusion 360
Drawing a Mug Mold Using OnShape CAD
Enter a Recipe Into Insight-live
Entering TestData Into Insight-Live
Fine tune the thixotropy of a glaze or engobe slurry
Getting Frustrated With a 55% Gerstley Borate Glaze
How I Developed the G2926B Cone 6 Transparent Base Glaze
How I Formulated G2934 Cone 6 Silky MgO Matte Glaze Using Insight-Live
How to Apply a White Slip to Terra Cotta Ware
How to Paste a Recipe Into Insight-live
Importing Data into Insight-live
Importing Desktop Insight Recipes to Insight-live
Importing Generic CSV Recipe Data into Insight-Live
Insight-Live Meets a Silica Deprived Glaze Recipe
Insight-Live Quick Tour
Liner Glazing a Stoneware Mug
Make a precision plaster mold for slip casting using Fusion 360 and 3D Printing
Making ceramic glaze flow test balls
Making test bars for the SHAB, LDW and DFAC tests
Manually program your kiln or suffer glaze defects!
Mica and Feldspar Mine of MGK Minerals
Predicting Glaze Durability by Chemistry in Insight-Live
Preparing Pictures for Insight-live
Replace Lithium Carbonate With Lithium Frit Using Insight-Live
Replacing 10% Gerstley Borate in a clear glaze
Same Beer Bottle Mold Using Fusion 360 and OnShape CAD
Signing Up at Insight-live.com
Signing-In at Insight-live.com
Slip cast a stoneware beer bottle
Substitute Ferro Frit 3134 For Another Frit
Substituting Custer Feldspar for Another in a Cone 10R Glaze Recipe
Thixotropy and How to Gel a Ceramic Glaze
Use Insight-live to substitute materials in a recipe
Watch Thixotropy Happen With a 20kg Batch of Dipping Glaze
Mica and Feldspar Mine of MGK Minerals
Video Unavailable
Please follow transcript instead.
Transcript/Notes
MGK Mica &
Feldspar
Mine of M/s MGK Trading House (P) Ltd.
This mine is situated on the own Patta land(84 Hect.) near village Uchapalli  about 7.5 km from Podalakur Mandal head quarter, which, is at a distance of 34 km from Nellore, where the nearest Railway station is located. National highway No.5 passes at a distance of 18 km from the lease area. Nearest major sea port is at Krisna pattanam (54Km) and nearest Aerodrome is at Renigunta which is at 82 km from the mines.
It is located in toposheet No. 57N/15, latitude 14O-29’ 58’’ longitude 79O 35’ 23’’. This area is surrounded by agricultural and waste lands. The topographic can be said as gentle slop towards south east only towards a seasonal nala i.e. seasonal local water flow. The topographic can be said as high gradient plane terrain. The highest and lowest level deference is 4 m.
more..
In the east middle part of the lease hold three pegmatite bodies were identified, which appears to be premier and best quartz / feldspar / mica mines. The eastern pegmatite is called main pegmatite body. This main pegmatite body is striking North-East with westerly dipping.  It has about 300m. strike length.  This was explored and exploited. The other pegmatite which is on the western side about 110m. distance is having 55m. strike length and dipping 60o towards west with striking almost North-South. This is also exploited.  In addition, there are one additional pegmatite outcropped on the southern side of the ML, and another on the North side of the lease boundary. This pit was earlier abandoned as mica concentration was less.
The presence of thick, simultaneous and parallel mica flakes (can be defined as remaining of old mica books) is the prominent feature for slow movement  during the pegmatization. This is the significant feature of high  availability of mica of economic nature.  In the south west part some quartzite exposures are there but by examining it is found that these are some stringes of quartzites which appears to be originated due to quartz sweating. So the pit excavated in this area is left  as a abandoned pit.
The area is predominantly covered by schists dominating by country rocks like Amphibole and biotite schist. Due to the alteration and loss of water molecule, some portion of biotite schist have been converted in to vermiculite schist. The pegmatite body of elongated dome trending north east – south west dipping south east at angle of 40o
The internal structure consists of boarder zone and wall zone. The boarder zone is widely well defined  thick coarse grained, It merges in to the wall zone composed of
Albite
– Aligoclase –Perthite and quartz. Wall zone / intermediate zone is a productive zone composed of Albite muscovite, quartz/feldspar with garnet as an accessory.
In this area the Geology can be concluded as, the mica pegmatite are intrusive in to the schistose series of rock along the folia of the shcists, noses of the folds and other structural futures. The pegmatites is observed to reveal dextral  and sinistral enchelon distribution with north and south pitches and mica shoots seem to be localized in similar structural horizons. Mica concentration near and along the quartz core and near the foot wall and hanging wall also were observed.
South west part of the lease hold comprises of vermiculite bearing mica schist with long headed flaky crystals which are called to be high grade vermiculite.
Links
Materials
MGK Soda Feldspar
Materials
MGK Alakali Feldspar
Materials
MGK Potash Feldspar
Materials
Feldspar
In
ceramics
,
feldspars
are used in glazes and
clay bodies
. They vitrify stonewares and porcelains. They supply
KNaO
flux
to glazes to help them melt.
Stockpile of crude feldspar from MGK Minerals (India) deposit
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Closeup of in-situ quartz mineral at the MGK quarry site in India
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Closeup of feldspar deposit in the MGK Minerals quarry in India
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Port Krishnapatnam is 65 kms from the MGK
feldspar
mines and 180 kms from the Chennai port.
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Map showing location of MGK
Feldspar
and Quartz mine near Chennai, India.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy