Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Media
3D Print a Test of the Beer Bottle Neck
3D Printing a Clay Cookie Cutter-Stamper
A 3-minute Mug with Plainsman Polar Ice
A Broken Glaze Meets Insight-Live and a Magic Material
Accessing Recipes from "Mid-Fire Glazes" book in Insight-Live
Adjusting the Thixotropy of an Engobe for Pottery
Analysing a Crazing, Cutlery-marking Glaze Using Insight-Live
Compare the Chemistry of Recipes Using Insight-Live
Connecting an External Image to Insight-Live Pictures
Converting G1214M Cone 6 transparent glaze to G1214Z matte
Create a Synthetic Feldspar in Insight-Live
Creating a Cone 6 Oil-Spot Overglaze Effect
Design a Triangular Pottery Plate Block Mold in Fusion 360
Designing a Jigger Mold for a Bowl Using Fusion 360 CAD
Downloading and 3D-Printing a 3MF file
Draw a propeller in Fusion 360 for use on an overhead propeller mixer
Drawing a Mug Handle Mold in Fusion 360
Drawing a Mug Mold Using OnShape CAD
Enter a Recipe Into Insight-live
Entering TestData Into Insight-Live
Fine tune the thixotropy of a glaze or engobe slurry
Getting Frustrated With a 55% Gerstley Borate Glaze
How I Developed the G2926B Cone 6 Transparent Base Glaze
How I Formulated G2934 Cone 6 Silky MgO Matte Glaze Using Insight-Live
How to Apply a White Slip to Terra Cotta Ware
How to Paste a Recipe Into Insight-live
Importing Data into Insight-live
Importing Desktop Insight Recipes to Insight-live
Importing Generic CSV Recipe Data into Insight-Live
Insight-Live Meets a Silica Deprived Glaze Recipe
Insight-Live Quick Tour
Liner Glazing a Stoneware Mug
Make a precision plaster mold for slip casting using Fusion 360 and 3D Printing
Making ceramic glaze flow test balls
Making test bars for the SHAB, LDW and DFAC tests
Manually program your kiln or suffer glaze defects!
Mica and Feldspar Mine of MGK Minerals
Predicting Glaze Durability by Chemistry in Insight-Live
Preparing Pictures for Insight-live
Replace Lithium Carbonate With Lithium Frit Using Insight-Live
Replacing 10% Gerstley Borate in a clear glaze
Same Beer Bottle Mold Using Fusion 360 and OnShape CAD
Signing Up at Insight-live.com
Signing-In at Insight-live.com
Slip cast a stoneware beer bottle
Substitute Ferro Frit 3134 For Another Frit
Substituting Custer Feldspar for Another in a Cone 10R Glaze Recipe
Thixotropy and How to Gel a Ceramic Glaze
Use Insight-live to substitute materials in a recipe
Watch Thixotropy Happen With a 20kg Batch of Dipping Glaze
Entering TestData Into Insight-Live
How to enter physical testing results into your group account at insight-live.com. We will enter data from shrinkage/absorption bars, the drying factor disk and an LOI/water content tester.
Click here
to watch this at youtube.com
 or
click here
to go to our Youtube channel
Better quality option on our CDN
Your browser does not support MP4 video.
Transcript/Notes
1
I'm going to enter the data for some shrinkage and absorption test bars, a drying disk and an
LOI
test into my Insight Live account.  In this case, I am
characterizing
a clay, discovering what it is, and what it might be useful for. The method is the same for doing quality control or
clay body
development and troubleshooting.
2
I gave this a
code number
of L4496, so all test specimens are stamped with that. Notice that I have uploaded photos showing the
silica sand
it contains, how it reacts to glazes, its cross section compared to one of our standard terra cottas, and the fired test bars. We did firings from
cone 06
all the way up to
cone 5
.
3
more..
Here are the test bars that came out of the dryer. The inset shows the data we can collect at that stage. It includes the length of each bar, the drying factor score, and the wet and dry weight of the
LOI
specimen.
Let’s look at the test data section at the bottom of the panel in
Insight-live
. Notice that all the data has been collected.
You can click the title of each section to learn more. For example, I'll click the one for "drying factor". Everything you need to know about making the specimen and interpreting its drying behavior is here.
The white columns are data we collected, the red ones are calculated values. Cone values had to be interpreted for each. Notice the "cone" column - this is how accurate our test firings are - only one overfired slightly.
4
I’ll click this "edit button" to see how it is entered.
The tests are on the right. The ones most frequently used are at the top of the list.
The data is on the left - each row of data belongs to a specimen.
The first column is the specimen number - it is stamped on the bars. We usually match it to the cone number, but it doesn’t really matter.
To edit data for a specimen, click on its specimen number.
In the picture, I am measuring bar number 8 - so I’ll click that one. This is where the value of “93.3” was entered.
How do you add a specimen? Choose the test, set the specimen number and click the "Add button".
5
Look at the other tests for a moment.
This one is the drying factor disk. For these, there are no calculated values - just enter the information observed (in this case, the drying factor and the amount of
soluble salts
on the disk).
The
sieve
analysis test likewise simply contains the weight of material found on each of the test
sieves
.
For the
LDW test
specimen I enter the wet weight, dry weight and fired weight. From these Insight-live can calculate the
water content
of the pugged material and the loss on ignition when fired.
6
Your typical workflow will involve entering data for batches of test specimens that have just been made or are coming out of the drier or test kilns.
You will likely be measuring specimens from multiple production runs or test projects. It is not necessary to go back to the recipe panel for each, you can use the "Search field". However, you must enter the complete code number for a match to be found. The implication here is that you have already created recipe records for each material or clay body being tested and assigned them unique
code numbers
.
So, what is the value in collecting all this data? First, it enables you the
characterize
a material or a clay body.
But,
ceramics
tends to be a comparative rather than an absolute science. That is why the second reason is so important: I can search for another clay and compare its data side-by-side with this one.
Links
Tests
Shrinkage/Absorption Test
SHAB Shrinkage and absorption test procedure for plastic
clay bodies
and materials
Glossary
Digitalfire Insight-Live
A cloud-hosted ceramics-targeted
LIMS
(lab info management system). It does
glaze chemistry
and
physical testing
the “Digitalfire way”. For technicians, educators, potters and hobbyists.
Glossary
Physical Testing
In
ceramics
, glazes,
engobes
and bodies have chemistries and
physics
. Your formulation and quality control most likely need to focus on the
physical properties
.
Articles
Setting up a Clay Testing Program in Your Company or Studio
Set up a routine testing pipeline and start generating historical data that will enable your staff to understand your source materials and maintain, adjust and troubleshoot your
clay body
recipes.
Routine SHAB testing creates valuable historical drying and firing data
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Suddenly, ware is coming out of your production kiln warped or cracked or off color. Unless the answer is obvious, the first action should be to compare its drying and firing test data with past runs. If you are doing that as a routine, then
SHAB test
bars (and the test result data they bring) will already be available. These bars are tests of slip
casting bodies
, they can be made in a
plaster
mold and length-marked as shown. That data is a
characterization
of the
clay body
. The value of this kind of data-gathering becomes evident when a disaster happens (or better yet, is prevented).
Clay bodies
have
plasticity
, dry performance, dry strength, fired density,
fired shrinkage
,
fired strength
, etc. If you have historical data (accompanied by
firing schedules
, recipes, etc), you have an invaluable tool. Where does one gather the data? In spreadsheets? No, in a database. An account at
Insight-live
.com is specifically intended for this.
Test bars from recent kiln firings
Here is how to enter the data into Insight-live
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Multiple batches of fired test bars, organized by temperature, have already been weighed and measured (the weights and lengths are written on the sides of the bars). Each batch is accompanied by the cones from the firing in the
test kiln
(these influence how the temperature is recorded and adjustments to kiln
firing schedules
). Since I am working on many runs, tests and projects at any given time, these tests pile up rapidly. And they generate a lot of
SHAB test
data that needs to be input into the
Insight-live
.com account promptly.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy