Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Media
3D Print a Test of the Beer Bottle Neck
3D Printing a Clay Cookie Cutter-Stamper
A 3-minute Mug with Plainsman Polar Ice
A Broken Glaze Meets Insight-Live and a Magic Material
Accessing Recipes from "Mid-Fire Glazes" book in Insight-Live
Adjusting the Thixotropy of an Engobe for Pottery
Analysing a Crazing, Cutlery-marking Glaze Using Insight-Live
Compare the Chemistry of Recipes Using Insight-Live
Connecting an External Image to Insight-Live Pictures
Converting G1214M Cone 6 transparent glaze to G1214Z matte
Create a Synthetic Feldspar in Insight-Live
Creating a Cone 6 Oil-Spot Overglaze Effect
Design a Triangular Pottery Plate Block Mold in Fusion 360
Designing a Jigger Mold for a Bowl Using Fusion 360 CAD
Downloading and 3D-Printing a 3MF file
Draw a propeller in Fusion 360 for use on an overhead propeller mixer
Drawing a Mug Handle Mold in Fusion 360
Drawing a Mug Mold Using OnShape CAD
Enter a Recipe Into Insight-live
Entering TestData Into Insight-Live
Fine tune the thixotropy of a glaze or engobe slurry
Getting Frustrated With a 55% Gerstley Borate Glaze
How I Developed the G2926B Cone 6 Transparent Base Glaze
How I Formulated G2934 Cone 6 Silky MgO Matte Glaze Using Insight-Live
How to Apply a White Slip to Terra Cotta Ware
How to Paste a Recipe Into Insight-live
Importing Data into Insight-live
Importing Desktop Insight Recipes to Insight-live
Importing Generic CSV Recipe Data into Insight-Live
Insight-Live Meets a Silica Deprived Glaze Recipe
Insight-Live Quick Tour
Liner Glazing a Stoneware Mug
Make a precision plaster mold for slip casting using Fusion 360 and 3D Printing
Making ceramic glaze flow test balls
Making test bars for the SHAB, LDW and DFAC tests
Manually program your kiln or suffer glaze defects!
Mica and Feldspar Mine of MGK Minerals
Predicting Glaze Durability by Chemistry in Insight-Live
Preparing Pictures for Insight-live
Replace Lithium Carbonate With Lithium Frit Using Insight-Live
Replacing 10% Gerstley Borate in a clear glaze
Same Beer Bottle Mold Using Fusion 360 and OnShape CAD
Signing Up at Insight-live.com
Signing-In at Insight-live.com
Slip cast a stoneware beer bottle
Substitute Ferro Frit 3134 For Another Frit
Substituting Custer Feldspar for Another in a Cone 10R Glaze Recipe
Thixotropy and How to Gel a Ceramic Glaze
Use Insight-live to substitute materials in a recipe
Watch Thixotropy Happen With a 20kg Batch of Dipping Glaze
Thixotropy and How to Gel a Ceramic Glaze
I will show you why thixotropy is so important. Glazes that you have never been able to suspend or apply evenly will work beautifully.
Click here
to watch this at youtube.com
 or
click here
to go to our Youtube channel
Transcript/Notes
Please excuse the poor framing of this video, I did it in the early days of camera eyeglasses (using Pivothead glasses).
If you mix your own glazes for
bisque
ware, understanding the difference between
specific gravity
,
viscosity
and
thixotropy
will change your life as a potter! Watch this video to see an example of a process, but pay more attention to this text to get a broader picture.
When mixing a glaze for the first time it is necessary to discover the right specific gravity (this depends on a number of factors). Once established then optionally gel the
slurry
to improve its thixotropy.
more..
How does one know what specific gravity to target? Start with a 100:80 ratio of well-mixed glaze powder to water. For almost all glazes this produces a slurry that is too viscous. Add water, while
propeller mixing
, until stopping the mixer leaves the slurry in motion for 2-3 seconds before it stops. Measure the specific gravity and do two simple tests:
1. Put your finger, or some other stirring implement, into the slurry and extract it. If the glaze hangs on, covering it evenly with only a couple of drips falling off, then it is ready.
2. Sedimentation testing: Let it sit for a few days. If no layer has
settled
on the bottom it is likely OK to try using as-is.
If test 1 or 2 fails then "thixotropy improvement" is now needed. Add water until the glaze stays in motion for 10 seconds after shutting off the mixer. Now, add the flocculant in small amounts, while mixing, until the slurry begins to gel (when right it should again stop and bounce back slightly after 2-3 seconds). Be careful not to add too much flocculant or it will turn into jelly (mix it with an unflocculated fresh batch to retrieve it). Let it sit again for a day or two. If it has settled then repeat the process of adding water and then flocculant (being careful not to add too much water, there is a point where it will no longer gel). When it is right, measure the specific gravity and remember that as the starting point for future batches.
There are special cases to consider:
1. The glaze has almost no clay. Add 2%
bentonite
, the extra particle
surface area
it imparts makes the flocculant much more effective.
2. The glaze contains significant clay (25% or more). The clay should suspend and gel the slurry enough to make it naturally
thixotropic
(no further action needed). Of course, even higher percentages of clay will cause other issues (e.g. excessive shrinkage on drying).
3. The glaze contains significant
Gerstley Borate
(GB). GB has the
suspending
power of
ball clay
. If there is 15% or more the slurry should gel naturally. If there is 25% or more it will gel too much and need a deflocculant.
4. The glaze contains significant GB and also clay. This is a problem, these require too much water and gel too much. Consider fixing the recipe by learning how to source
B
2
O
3
from a
frit
rather than GB (there are videos and articles here on doing that).
Links
Glossary
Thixotropy
Thixotropy
is a property of ceramic slurries of high
water content
.
Thixotropic
suspensions flow when moving but gel after sitting (for a few moments more depending on application). This phenomenon is helpful in getting even, drip-free glaze coverage.
Glossary
Specific gravity
In
ceramics
, the
specific gravity
of slurries tells us their water-to-solids ratio. That ratio is a key indicator of performance and enabler of consistency.
Glossary
Viscosity
In ceramic slurries (especially casting slips, but also glazes) the degree of fluidity of the
suspension
is important to its performance.
Materials
Gerstley Borate
Gerstley Borate
was a natural source of
boron
for ceramic glazes. It was plastic and melted clear at 1750F. Now we need to replace it. How?
Recipes
G2934 - Matte Glaze Base for Cone 6
A base
MgO
matte glaze
recipe fires to a hard utilitarian surface and has very good working properties. Blend in the glossy if it is too matte.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy