Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Media
3D Print a Test of the Beer Bottle Neck
3D Printing a Clay Cookie Cutter-Stamper
A 3-minute Mug with Plainsman Polar Ice
A Broken Glaze Meets Insight-Live and a Magic Material
Accessing Recipes from "Mid-Fire Glazes" book in Insight-Live
Adjusting the Thixotropy of an Engobe for Pottery
Analysing a Crazing, Cutlery-marking Glaze Using Insight-Live
Compare the Chemistry of Recipes Using Insight-Live
Connecting an External Image to Insight-Live Pictures
Converting G1214M Cone 6 transparent glaze to G1214Z matte
Create a Synthetic Feldspar in Insight-Live
Creating a Cone 6 Oil-Spot Overglaze Effect
Design a Triangular Pottery Plate Block Mold in Fusion 360
Designing a Jigger Mold for a Bowl Using Fusion 360 CAD
Downloading and 3D-Printing a 3MF file
Draw a propeller in Fusion 360 for use on an overhead propeller mixer
Drawing a Mug Handle Mold in Fusion 360
Drawing a Mug Mold Using OnShape CAD
Enter a Recipe Into Insight-live
Entering TestData Into Insight-Live
Fine tune the thixotropy of a glaze or engobe slurry
Getting Frustrated With a 55% Gerstley Borate Glaze
How I Developed the G2926B Cone 6 Transparent Base Glaze
How I Formulated G2934 Cone 6 Silky MgO Matte Glaze Using Insight-Live
How to Apply a White Slip to Terra Cotta Ware
How to Paste a Recipe Into Insight-live
Importing Data into Insight-live
Importing Desktop Insight Recipes to Insight-live
Importing Generic CSV Recipe Data into Insight-Live
Insight-Live Meets a Silica Deprived Glaze Recipe
Insight-Live Quick Tour
Liner Glazing a Stoneware Mug
Make a precision plaster mold for slip casting using Fusion 360 and 3D Printing
Making ceramic glaze flow test balls
Making test bars for the SHAB, LDW and DFAC tests
Manually program your kiln or suffer glaze defects!
Mica and Feldspar Mine of MGK Minerals
Predicting Glaze Durability by Chemistry in Insight-Live
Preparing Pictures for Insight-live
Replace Lithium Carbonate With Lithium Frit Using Insight-Live
Replacing 10% Gerstley Borate in a clear glaze
Same Beer Bottle Mold Using Fusion 360 and OnShape CAD
Signing Up at Insight-live.com
Signing-In at Insight-live.com
Slip cast a stoneware beer bottle
Substitute Ferro Frit 3134 For Another Frit
Substituting Custer Feldspar for Another in a Cone 10R Glaze Recipe
Thixotropy and How to Gel a Ceramic Glaze
Use Insight-live to substitute materials in a recipe
Watch Thixotropy Happen With a 20kg Batch of Dipping Glaze
Manually program your kiln or suffer glaze defects!
To do a drop-and-hold firing you must manually program your kiln controller. It is the secret to surfaces without pinholes and blisters.
Click here
to watch this at youtube.com
 or
click here
to go to our Youtube channel
Transcript/Notes
There is no other way to do a
drop-and-hold
firing but
manually program
your computer controller. If you are using the built-in
firing schedules
in kilns then your glazes are not the quality they could be!
What is drop-and-hold? It is a firing that holds at the top temperature only long enough to even out the heat, then drop one hundred degrees (or what is appropriate for your glazes) and hold the temperature there (e.g. half an hour)
Why should you do this?
Crystalline glazes
.
Rutile glazes
develop much better. But there is a much more important example. If you are using bodies that contain particles that produce gases during firing these have to escape. If they are generated after the glaze melts, they have to bubble through it. If the latter is not able to heal a
pinhole
will result, if it partially heals you could have a
blister
and if it almost heals a dimple. Materials in the glaze itself also gas, some quite late in the firing. The problem with soaking at top temperature is that reactions that produce gases are ongoing, bubbles just keeping coming. Some bodies have so many particulates that gas during latter stages of firing that it is almost impossible to fire defect-free glazes on them. This is particularly true with low temperature
terra cotta
bodies. But using this technique completely solves the problem! You might think that the glaze will not be fluid and mobile enough to smooth out but most glazes, especially those with
boron
, begin to melt far lower than you might think. Ideally one should try different drop-and-hold temperatures to arrive at one that is a good compromise between sufficient glaze melt mobility and maximum reaction shut down.
more..
Links
Glossary
Bisque
Potters and some manufacturers fire ceramic ware twice, once to prepare it for glazing (call
bisquit firing
) and the second time to melt the glaze onto it.
Glossary
Firing Schedule
Designing a good kiln
firing schedule
for your ware is a very important, and often overlooked factor for obtained successful firings.
Glossary
Kiln Firing
All types of ceramic are fired in a kiln to cement particles together to produce a hard and water and temperature resistant product.
Glossary
Pinholing
Pinholing
is a common surface defect that occurs with ceramic glazes. The problem emerges from the kiln and can occur erratically in production.
Glossary
Soaking
The process of holding a kiln at the final temperature (or at other temperatures) to enable the heat to penetrate the ware or to effect or complete a glaze or body reaction
Glossary
Drop-and-Soak Firing
A kiln
firing schedule
where temperature is eased to the top, then dropped quickly and held at a temperature 100-200F lower.
Troubles
Glaze Blisters
Questions and suggestions to help you reason out the real cause of ceramic glaze
blistering
and
bubbling
problems and work out a solution
Troubles
Glaze Pinholes, Pitting
Analyze the causes of ceramic glaze
pinholing
and pitting so your fix is dealing with the real issues, not a symptom.
Manually programming a Bartlett V6-CF hobby kiln controller
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
I document programs in my account at
insight-live
.com, then print them out and enter them into the controller. This controller can hold six, it calls them Users. The one I last edited is the one that runs when I press "Start". When I press the "Enter Program" button it asks which User: I key in "2" (for my
cone 6
lab tests). It asks how many segments: I press Enter to accept the 3 (remember, I am editing the program). After that it asks questions about each step (rows 2, 3, 4): the Ramp "rA" (degrees F/hr), the Temperature to go to (°F) to and the Hold time in minutes (HLdx). In this program I am heating at 300F/hr to 240F  and holding 60 minutes, then 400/hr to 2095 and holding zero minutes, then at 108/hr to 2195 and holding 10 minutes. The last step is to set a temperature where an alarm should start sounding (I set 9999 so it will never sound). When complete it reads "Idle". Then I press the "Start" button to begin. If I want to change it I press the "Stop" button. Those ten other buttons? Don't use them, automatic firing is not accurate. One more thing: If it is not responding to "Enter Program" press the Stop button first.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy