Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Projects
2019 Jiggering-Casting Project of Medalta 66 Mug
A cereal bowl jigger mold made using 3D printing
Beer Bottle Master Mold via 3D Printing
Better porosity for Brown Sugar Savers
Build a kiln monitoring device
Celebration Project
Coffee Mug Slip Casting Mold via 3D Printing
Comparing the Melt Fluidity of 16 Frits
Cookie Cutting clay with 3D printed cutters
Evaluating a clay's suitability for use in pottery
Make a mold for 4-gallon stackable calciners
Make Your Own Pyrometric Cones
Make your own sieve shaker to process ceramic slurries
Making a high quality ceramic tile
Making a Plaster Table
Making Bricks
Making our own kiln posts using a hand extruder
Medalta Ball Pitcher Slip Casting Mold via 3D Printing
Medalta Jug Master Mold Development
Mold Natches
Mother Nature's Porcelain - Plainsman 3B
Mug Handle Casting
Nursery plant pot mold via 3D printing
Pie-Crust Mug-Making Method
Plainsman 3D, Mother Nature's Porcelain/Stoneware
Project to Document a Shimpo Jiggering Attachment
Roll, Cut, Pull, Attach Handle-making Method
Slurry Mixing and Dewatering Your Own Clay Body
Testing a New Load of EP Kaolin
Using milk as a glaze
Medalta Jug Master Mold Development
I want to create a classic jug to commemorate those made by the
Medalta Potteries
here in the early part of the 20th century. I will use a casting process and
3D design
and
3D printing
for the mold making.
Related Information
Initial model drawing for a stoneware jug
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
I found this picture online of one of the original jug styles they made. We are not including handle yet. We are learning (my
Upwork
worker Oleksii and I) about how to make these models more parameterized. This one has more than a dozen settings that I can change and the drawing adjusts automatically.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy