Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Projects
2019 Jiggering-Casting Project of Medalta 66 Mug
A cereal bowl jigger mold made using 3D printing
Beer Bottle Master Mold via 3D Printing
Better porosity for Brown Sugar Savers
Build a kiln monitoring device
Celebration Project
Coffee Mug Slip Casting Mold via 3D Printing
Comparing the Melt Fluidity of 16 Frits
Cookie Cutting clay with 3D printed cutters
Evaluating a clay's suitability for use in pottery
Make a mold for 4-gallon stackable calciners
Make Your Own Pyrometric Cones
Make your own sieve shaker to process ceramic slurries
Making a high quality ceramic tile
Making a Plaster Table
Making Bricks
Making our own kiln posts using a hand extruder
Medalta Ball Pitcher Slip Casting Mold via 3D Printing
Medalta Jug Master Mold Development
Mold Natches
Mother Nature's Porcelain - Plainsman 3B
Mug Handle Casting
Nursery plant pot mold via 3D printing
Pie-Crust Mug-Making Method
Plainsman 3D, Mother Nature's Porcelain/Stoneware
Project to Document a Shimpo Jiggering Attachment
Roll, Cut, Pull, Attach Handle-making Method
Slurry Mixing and Dewatering Your Own Clay Body
Testing a New Load of EP Kaolin
Using milk as a glaze
Making our own kiln posts using a hand extruder
Posts don't need to have
thermal shock
resistance like shelves do. And they don't need to be as
refractory
. They don’t require tensile strength. And they don't require powerful pressing or extruding equipment to make them. Any potter who is mixing glazes or
clay bodies
already has the materials to make them.
3-D printing has suddenly made it easy to extrude round or square or even complex hollow shapes and tubes. This is possible because it is now easy to make highly precise compression dies for extruders. They can be made out of a variety of metals and plastics.
Related Information
Making Your Own Heavy Duty v1 Kiln Posts
The tools and supplies needed will enable other things too
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Supply chain
issues during Covid made it difficult to get posts. I wondered if I could make my own. I have access to the same ceramic materials that post manufacturers use. The highest temperature we fire is cone 10. In the past, it was always a hassle to make the extruder die, but not anymore. An ordinary
3D printed
PLA
template will easily withstand the pressure in a hand extruder (even if printed with
infill
). The precision of the geometry is amazing. Notice that the floating centre has a tapered bridge to help clay knit together as it flows around it. What about a
refractory
plastic body? I started with
L4543
, it is cheap to make and dries quickly with minimal shrinkage (I
slurry it up
using a
propeller mixer
and dewater on a
plaster table
). To cut posts to length with a square end I print sleeves to slide them into.
Inbound Photo Links
I Just Made These Kiln Posts Using a Hand Extruder
Get the v2 CAD drawing to do it yourself
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy