Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Projects
2019 Jiggering-Casting Project of Medalta 66 Mug
A cereal bowl jigger mold made using 3D printing
Beer Bottle Master Mold via 3D Printing
Better porosity for Brown Sugar Savers
Build a kiln monitoring device
Celebration Project
Coffee Mug Slip Casting Mold via 3D Printing
Comparing the Melt Fluidity of 16 Frits
Cookie Cutting clay with 3D printed cutters
Evaluating a clay's suitability for use in pottery
Make a mold for 4-gallon stackable calciners
Make Your Own Pyrometric Cones
Make your own sieve shaker to process ceramic slurries
Making a high quality ceramic tile
Making a Plaster Table
Making Bricks
Making our own kiln posts using a hand extruder
Medalta Ball Pitcher Slip Casting Mold via 3D Printing
Medalta Jug Master Mold Development
Mold Natches
Mother Nature's Porcelain - Plainsman 3B
Mug Handle Casting
Nursery plant pot mold via 3D printing
Pie-Crust Mug-Making Method
Plainsman 3D, Mother Nature's Porcelain/Stoneware
Project to Document a Shimpo Jiggering Attachment
Roll, Cut, Pull, Attach Handle-making Method
Slurry Mixing and Dewatering Your Own Clay Body
Testing a New Load of EP Kaolin
Using milk as a glaze
Making a high quality ceramic tile
Making a professional floor tile is about the back of the tile as well as the glazed surface. It is about a
clay body
that will fire strong and durable. One that is fine grained on which glazes will fire without
pinhole
and
blister
defects. About a non-plastic clay that will dust-press well and dry quickly with minimal shrinkage. And about a clay that vitrifies enough to develop the needed strength, yet not shrink so much that
fired warping
cannot be overcome. It is about a non-slip glaze. And, again, it is about being flat, very flat. A studio potter can actually make a flat tile, that is amazing. A small scale operation should be able to automate enough to make custom tile viable.
More information coming soon.
Related Information
The back on my first tile
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
I rolled the clay over the tile and cut it to size using a fettling knife. The clay is
vitreous
, but it is not fine-particled enough to produce clean edges and corners. The reason for the raised edge on commercial tiles become clear on this first firing: The glaze can go right to the bottom edge without being in danger of coming into contact with the kiln shelf. Of course, because it was not cut using a
cookie cutter
, the edges and corners are not nearly as straight and perfect as they should be.
3D drawing of the shell mold
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
I pour
plaster
into this
3D-printed
shell mold to create a working plaster test mold. Then I press and roll the clay into that plaster form. Then I lay stretch plastic wrap over the rolled surface. The subsequent cut (using the printed
cookie cutter
shown) rounds the edges perfectly as the plastic stretches downward into the cut.
It possible to make a thin flat porcelain tile from a plastic pottery body
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Yes. The body is
Plainsman
M370
(~ 25
silica
, 25
feldspar
, 30
kaolin
, 20
ball clay
+
talc
to tune
maturity
), a plastic
throwing
clay with far too much
drying shrinkage
to be suitable for tile. It is 3.8 mm thick fired (vs. commercial tiles are 5-7mm) and 33cm (13 in) square. It dried absolutely flat between sheets of plasterboard. We have even achieved total flat drying at this size using
Polar Ice
.
Bisque
and glaze firing were on an alumina shelf in an electric pottery kiln (at 300F/hr up through
quartz inversion
on the glaze firing), a completely unsuitable method for firing tile evenly top and bottom. Cooling on both firings was free-fall in a fairly empty kiln. Yet, it is flat! And flexible enough that I could lay it on the cement floor and stand on it without it breaking! Of course, to produce these consistently, special furniture that sinks minimal heat and a kiln that can evenly apply it front and back are needed. This is doable for custom applications. Of course, to compete in the commercial market, they need to be dust-pressed and there are lots of specifications to meet.
Links
Projects
Plainsman 3D, Mother Nature's Porcelain/Stoneware
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy