Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Firing Schedules
03DSFF - Cone 03 Fast Fire
04DSDH - Low Temperature Drop-and-Hold
BQ1000 - Plainsman Electric Bisque Firing Schedule
BRTF05 - Bartlett Fast Glaze Cone 05
BRTF6 - Bartlett Fast Glaze Cone 6
BRTS6 - Bartlett Slow Glaze Cone 6
BTFB04 - Bartlett Fast Bisque Cone 04
BTSB04 - Bartlett Slow Bisque Cone 04
BTSG05 - Bartlett Slow Glaze Cone 05
C04PLTP - Plainsman Low Temperature Drop-and-hold
C10RPL - Plainsman Cone 10R Firing
C5DHSC - Plainsman Cone 5 Drop-and-Hold Slow-Cool
C6DHSC - Plainsman Cone 6 Drop-and-hold, Slow Cool
C6IRED - Cone 6 Iron Reds
C6MSGL1 - Mastering Glazes Cone 6
C6PLST - Plainsman Cone 6 Electric Standard
FSCG1 - Shimbo Crystal Schedule 1
FSCGB1 - Shimbo Crystal Holding Pattern 2
FSCGCL - Shimbo Crystal Celestite Schedule
FSCGWM - Wollast-O-Matte Fara Shimbo Crystalline Glaze
FSCRGL - GC106 Base for Crystalline Glazes
FSHP1 - Shimbo Crystal Holding Pattern 1
FSHP3 - Shimbo Crystal Holding Pattern 3
FSNM5 - Fa's Number Five
MDDCL - Medalta Decal Firing
PLC6CR - Cone 6 Crystal Glaze Plainsman
PLC6DS - Cone 6 Drop-and-Soak Firing Schedule
QICA - Quartz Inversion Cracking Avoider
"PLC6DS" Firing Schedule
Cone 6 Drop-and-Soak Firing Schedule
For the reasons explained here this schedule is much superior to those built into
kiln controllers
(they have no holds, no controlled cooling).
We use this, instead of the
C6DHSC
schedule, when firing variations of
G2934
(slow cooling makes our versions too matte). We do not generally fire large or densely-packed kiln loads (which slow-cool naturally), in our test kilns this cools fairly quickly. An advantage of this schedule is that it takes less time, firings closed in an afternoon are ready to open in the morning.
-Step 1. Drying needs to be complete because the next step proceeds rapidly. Extend the soaking time if your ware is thick or heavy or the kiln is densely loaded. 250F, although above boiling point, is not enough to fracture ware, but needed to completely dry it.
-Step 2 climbs quickly, your kiln may or may not be able to maintain the rate. If it can, consider increasing it to 400F/hr. The optional soak is to even out the heat distribution in the ware and enable the micro-bubble clouds of escaping gases of
decomposition
to combine and escape before the final push to top temperature (with a lower bubble population during that push). To simply heal
blisters
, the soak part of this step is not needed.
-Step 3: The push to the final temperature. Include a
self-supporting cone
6 frequently in firings to monitor the accuracy of your controller. Adjust this step to correspond to where the tip of
cone 6
falls even with the top of the base (see picture below). We use this 10-minute hold for a small
test kiln
, larger kilns will need a longer hold to stabilize temperature within the chamber.
- Step 4: Free-fall 100F and hold. The reason: Bubbles often just percolate during soaks at top temperature, becoming blisters in the fired ware. Holding at the lower temperature imposes a melt
viscosity
sufficient to overcome
surface tension
and burst the bubbles but still has enough fluidity to heal them. You may need to customize this temperature for your kiln, ware and glazes. For example, if glazes are more fluid and reactive, drop lower, perhaps 200F down. Do not go too low or the glaze could crystallize during the soak.
You must program your firing manually, there is no built-in schedule even remotely similar to this. Don't have a
kiln controller
? By a little experimentation, you can develop a switching pattern to approximate this.
Step
°C
°F
Hold
Time
1
60°C/hr to 121C
108°F/hr to 250F
60min
2:37
Longer soak if bisque ware is waterlogged and heavy
2
194°C/hr to 1148C
350°F/hr to 2100F
0
7:54
Optionally soak here 30 minutes to clear bubble clouds
3
60°C/hr to 1204C
108°F/hr to 2200F
10min
8:59
Slow this rise or extend hold if the kiln is very densely loaded
4
500°C/hr to 1148C
900°F/hr to 2100F
30min
9:36
This step heals blisters, clears more bubbles
Start temperature assumed: 25°C or 75°F
"Fahrenheit degrees" is not the same as "degrees Fahrenheit". 
			A 100° reading on a Fahrenheit thermometer is equal to a 37° reading on a Celcius thermometer. 
			But "100 Fahrenheit degrees of temperature change" is equivalent "55 Celsius degrees of change". 
			That is an important distinction to understand the above temperature conversions.
Related Information
Manually programming a Bartlett V6-CF hobby kiln controller
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
I document programs in my account at
insight-live
.com, then print them out and enter them into the controller. This controller can hold six, it calls them Users. The one I last edited is the one that runs when I press "Start". When I press the "Enter Program" button it asks which User: I key in "2" (for my
cone 6
lab tests). It asks how many segments: I press Enter to accept the 3 (remember, I am editing the program). After that it asks questions about each step (rows 2, 3, 4): the Ramp "rA" (degrees F/hr), the Temperature to go to (°F) to and the Hold time in minutes (HLdx). In this program I am heating at 300F/hr to 240F  and holding 60 minutes, then 400/hr to 2095 and holding zero minutes, then at 108/hr to 2195 and holding 10 minutes. The last step is to set a temperature where an alarm should start sounding (I set 9999 so it will never sound). When complete it reads "Idle". Then I press the "Start" button to begin. If I want to change it I press the "Stop" button. Those ten other buttons? Don't use them, automatic firing is not accurate. One more thing: If it is not responding to "Enter Program" press the Stop button first.
Program your firings manually
Calibrate the final temperature using cones
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Here is an example of our lab
firing schedule
for cone 10 oxidation (which the cone-fire mode does not do correctly). To actually go to cone 10 we need to manually create a program that fires higher than the built-in cone-fire one. Determining how high to go is a matter of repeated firings verified using a
self-supporting cone
(regular cones are not accurate). I keep notes in the schedule record in an account at
insight-live
.com. And we have a chart on the wall showing the latest temperature for each of the cones we fire to. What about
cone 6
? Controllers fire it to 2235, we put down a cone at 2200!
How many degrees between these cone positions?
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
I was consistently getting the cone on the left when using a custom-programmed
firing schedule
to 2204F (for
cone 6
with ten minute hold). However Orton recommends that the tip of the self supporting cone should be even with the top of the base (they consider the indicating part of the cone to be the part above the base). So I adjusted the program to finish at
2200F
and got the cone on the right. But note: This applies to that kiln at that point in time (with that pyrometer and that firing schedule). Our other
test kiln
bends the cone to 5 o'clock at 2195F. Since
kiln controllers
fire cone 6 at 2230 (for the built-in one-button firings) your kiln is almost certainly over firing!
Glaze with an encapsulated stain is bubbling. It needs Zircopax.
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
These two pieces are fired at
cone 6
. The
base transparent
glaze is the same -
G2926B
Plainsman
transparent. The amount of encapsulated red stain is the same (11% Mason 6021 Dark Red). But two things are different. Number 1: 2%
Zircopax
(
zircon
) has been added to the upper glaze. The stain manufacturers recommend this, saying that it makes for a brighter color. However, that is not what we see here. What we do see is the particles of unmelting zircon acting as seeds and collection points for the bubbles (the larger ones produced are escaping). Number 2: The
firing schedule
. The top one has been fired to approach cone 6 and 100F/hr, held for five minutes at
2200F
(cone 6 as verified in our kiln by cones), dropped quickly to 2100F and held for 30 minutes.
One fired flawless, the other dimpled and pinholed.
These are the same glaze/body.  Why?
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
The difference is a slow-cool firing. Both mugs are
Plainsman
M340
and have the
L3954B
black
engobe
inside and partway down on the outside. Both were
dip-glazed
with the
GA6-B
amber transparent and fired to
cone 6
. The one on the right was fired using the
PLC6DS
drop-and-hold
schedule. That eliminated any
blisters
, but some
pinholes
remained. The one on the left was fired using the
C6DHSC
slow-cool schedule. That differs in one way: It cools at 150F/hr from 2100F to 1400F (as opposed to a free-fall). It is amazing how much this improves the brilliance and surface quality (not fully indicated by this photo, the mug on the left is much better).
Blisters in a highly melt-fluid cone 6 sculpture glaze
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Why are these happening (on this piece by Paul Briggs)? It is not completely clear. The glaze has plenty of carbonates, including copper, enough for over 20%
LOI
. But these normally produce high populations of small
blisters
, this is the opposite.
The melt
appears to have enough
surface tension
that the bubbles survive and endure top-temperature-soaking. And they don't pop until the temperature has dropped so far that insufficient melt-mobility remains to heal them. The glaze has an unconventionally low
SiO
2
content, that makes it flow vigorously, well enough that the melt is moving and collecting in surface contours. The glaze recipe is quite unconventional, any effort to "improve" its adherence to limits would likely lose the visual aesthetic. A
drop-and-hold
firing schedule
is likely the key to alleviating this.
6% rutile is too much in this cone 6 oxidation glaze
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Rutile
variegates glaze surfaces. But it also opacifies at higher percentages. The blue effect is a product of
crystallization
that occurs during cooling, it is thus dependent on a slower cooling cycle, especially above 1400F. This is
GA6-C
Alberta Slip
glaze with 4, 5 and 6% rutile. At 6% the rutile crystallization has advanced to the point of completely opacifying the glaze. At 5% the blue is still strong, even on a buff burning body. The loss of color occurs suddenly, somewhere between 5 and 6 percent. Rutile
chemistry
varies from batch to batch. The blue develops differently on different bodies. So do you want to play "at the edge", with 5% in the glaze, in view of these other factors and the finicky firing curve needed. Change in any of which could push it into the blueless zone?
Old-style hobby kilns with a sitter are usable if you become "the controller"!
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Yes. This kiln has a Dawson LT-3
kiln sitter
(new ones have electronic controllers). It is a mechanical device with a safety timer and triggered latch on the external housing. A ceramic tube extends into the chamber where a
pyrometric cone
sits on supports with a rod on the top center. As the cone softens and bends the rod drops with it and eventually releases the shut-off latch. The utility of this depends on careful placement of the cone, sitter adjustment and keeping the rods and supports in good condition. Although not shown, these kilns had a pyrometer and one or more
thermocouples
(temperature gauge and heat sensing probes). Is a kiln like this useable today? Yes - if you become "the controller"! Learning to use a kiln like this involves monitoring cones on each shelf (self-supporting cones are recommended). By "babysitting" the switch settings (low, medium, high) during firings and creating paper logs (and graphs) to track the kiln's temperature against time over multiple firings you can evolve a schedule of switch-setting, from low-to-medium-to-high. It is possible to get the desired climb, even heat distribution, achieve the final temperature accurately and even implement
drop-and-hold
and slow cool firings. Vigilance of changes in the firing speed can be balanced by adjustments to the switch-change times.
Links
Troubles
Glaze Blisters
Questions and suggestions to help you reason out the real cause of ceramic glaze
blistering
and
bubbling
problems and work out a solution
Recipes
G2934 - Matte Glaze Base for Cone 6
A base
MgO
matte glaze
recipe fires to a hard utilitarian surface and has very good working properties. Blend in the glossy if it is too matte.
Recipes
G2926B - Cone 6 Whiteware/Porcelain transparent glaze
A
base transparent
glaze recipe created by
Tony Hansen
, it fires high gloss and ultra clear with low melt mobility.
Materials
Ulexite
A natural source of
boron
, it melts at a very low temperature to a clear glass.
Glossary
Glaze Blisters
Blistering
is a common surface defect that occurs with ceramic glazes. The problem emerges from the kiln and can occur erratically in production. And be difficult to solve.
Glossary
Drop-and-Soak Firing
A kiln
firing schedule
where temperature is eased to the top, then dropped quickly and held at a temperature 100-200F lower.
Glossary
Rutile Blue Glazes
A type of ceramic glaze in which the surface variegates and crystallizes on cooling in the presence of
titanium
and iron (usually sourced by
rutile
)
Glossary
Glaze Bubbles
Suspended
micro-bubbles
in ceramic glazes affect their transparency and depth. Sometimes they add to to aesthetics. Often not. What causes them and what to do to remove them.
Firing Schedules
Plainsman Cone 6 Drop-and-hold, Slow Cool
350F/hr to 2100F, 108/hr to 2200, hold 10 minutes, fastdrop to 2100, hold 30 minutes, 150/hr to 1400
Firing Schedules
Bartlett Fast Glaze Cone 6
570F/hr to 1982F, 200/hr to 2232, no holds, no control cool
Firing Schedules
Bartlett Slow Glaze Cone 6
400F/hr to 1982F, 120F/hr to 2232, no holds or controlled cool
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy