Contact Me
Let's have a
together and answer your questions.
Other ways to Support My Work
Subscribe to
Insight-Live.com
. It is about DIY testing and development, not letting information slip away.
Help Me on Social
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Login to your online account
Chemistry plus physics. 
Maintain your recipes, test results, firing schedules, pictures, materials, projects, etc. 
Access your data from any connected device. Import desktop Insight data (and of other products).
 Group accounts for industry and education. Private accounts for potters.
Get started
.
Your browser does not support MP4 video.
Download for Mac, PC, Linux
Interactive glaze chemistry for the desktop. Free (no longer in development but still maintained, M1 Mac version now available). 
Download
here
or in the Files panel within your Insight-live.com account.
What people have said about Digitalfire
I used Boraq 3 as I wanted the layered action and for the first time, I GOT IT.  Thrilled is an understatement. I used the boraq 3 formula in the floating blue receipe and it's wonderful!!!!! My 2000 gram test was encouraging and the 4500 gram test looks great.  I've glazed only a few test pieces with larger ones going in later this week.  Right now I am one happy campette.
Just wanted to tell you I just found your site and find it extremely useful.  Got it
bookmarked and will be referring to it frequently.  Great job!  Thank you!
I normally do not comment on articles I find, but this is amazing.  Thank you so much for providing this information! I am a ceramics student in my BFA year, and this is the most comprehensive and helpful information I have found on creating a porcelain casting slip.
However I do believe you have the most comprehensive information anywhere in the world, and I would not hesitate to contact you for any information I required for Ceramic Glaze. I will also refer my associates to you if ever they require assistance.
I have been studying your web site and which I have found extremely helpful for someone like me who is not a chemist!
Firstly, I want to thank you about this very good site in the net which helps very much in the development of the ceramics industry.
I love your site and am so grateful for all you have done to help with 
glaze formulation/safety.
I truly love the CeramicMaterials.info database and use it frequently.
I am impressed with your site - it is very comprehensive.
First I want to thank you for creating and maintaining your web site. I started as a potter and moved into ceramic engineering over the course of my career and your web site has helped me all the way. Currently I am working on digital ceramic ink jet printing.
What people have said about Insight-Live
I am a computer/tech guy and was drawn to your info because it is systematic, detailed and comprehensive. I started pottery and wheel throwing January 2018 on my 59th bday. I am ecstatic!
Tony, you're a gentleman and a scholar. Thanks for the information. I'm a self-taught potter living in Hansville, WA. could not have done it without your scientific approach and papers.
Hi Tony, I love Digitalfire and Insight-Live. I am an enthusiastic hobby potter working on a long-term project to make a book on low-fire glazes and I fire a few thousand test tiles each year. I'm excited you are bringing a next round of improvements to Insight Live and offline capabilities.
I am eternally indebted to you for all that you have done to advance the technical abilities of non-industrial pottery! I love using Insight.
A short, but comprehensive description with lots of needful information like yours is rarely to be found in the internet.
Bravo!
First, I want to thank you for all the help we got from Digital Fire; thank you very much for this huge work and to share it like that.
Your work is so thorough and helpful Tony. When I read your articles I suddenly feel I know nothing, despite working professionally with ceramics since 1997!
Your information has really been a Godsend to so many challenges we have overcome. All of your efforts have really made such a HUGE difference in our studio, rarely is there a day where your shared knowledge directly or indirectly is part of my life. We are eternally grateful for what you have unknowingly (until now) done for us.
Just to tell you that digitalfire and insight-live are the best online resources I have come across! Thanks for all the work that has gone into your websites.
I'd like to say that I am so thankful for all the work you have done by creating and hosting Digitalfire. It has been an unparalleled resource for me as I learn more and more about glaze chemistry. I really enjoy your articles and photo comments and I'm just fascinated by the well of knowledge that seems to spring forth from them.
Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
Monthly Tech-Tip from Tony Hansen
I will send practical posts like these (from thousands I maintain). No ads or tracking. The first email will provide one-click unsubscribe.
Signup is being email-bombed by bots. For now, please subscribe inside your insight-live.com account.
Blog
Same body, same outside glaze.
But the inside transparent glaze is different
Glazing black
clay bodies
stained with manganese is just about impossible with typical
transparent glazes
. The glaze over-fluxes the clay surface and ruins the color. Worse, if it accelerates surface
maturity
, the body can
blister
or generate
LOI
gases that blister the glaze. How about transparent glazes over a black
engobe
instead? At least the body color is not lost. But the wrong transparent glaze can do what you see here (inside left).
These mugs are a buff
stoneware
,
Plainsman
M340
. A black engobe was applied by pouring the inside and dipping the outside two-thirds of the way down.
Left: A
L3954F
black engobe was applied inside and upper exterior at
leather hard
. After firing to
cone 6
using the
PLC6DS
schedule, G2926B—which is crystal clear on
M340
itself—became completely clouded over the engobe because bubbles generated during firing remained trapped in
the melt
.
Right: The entire mug was dipped in
GA6-B
. The
Alberta Slip
particles and the melt characteristics of
GA6-B
promote bubble coalescence and escape, producing an exceptionally glossy jet-black surface over the same engobe.
Monday 8th June 2026
Here is what dipping engobes can do:
Go on even. In one coat. Stay put.
When you learn to make and use
engobes
correctly, they make magic possible. Here I am turning a dark rustic body into a smooth white one (rear mugs) and a white body into a dark one (front). The engobes have been applied at the
leather-hard
stage. That is the perfect time, the
engobe
and body are
clay bodies
, designed to fit each other; they dry together and fire together creating an inseparable bond.
Handles have been applied, and they have dried to stiff
leather hard
. Engobe was poured in, poured out, then the mugs were pressed, lip down, into it and extracted. No dwell time was needed. This dipping engobe is
DIY
thixotropic
(not available commercially anywhere). That means I tuned it just before use, to just the right degree of gel (enough for it to drain to the right thickness, then gel just as the last few drops fall from the rim). Honestly, these are a beauty to behold at this stage, the silky, drip-free surface is just so perfect.
Context:
L3954B
,
How stop dripping and..
,
Here s how I..
,
Why your supplier does..
,
Why your supplier does..
Monday 8th June 2026
No glaze chemistry needed
At least not right away
You have 147
glaze recipes
. How can you get your head around all of them? Is
glaze chemistry
needed? No, that's a "maybe" way in the future. Right now, you need to start organized documentation. The recipe for each. A few pictures of each fired on different
clay bodies
, different thicknesses. Perhaps slow and fast-cooled firing. This is what an account at
Insight-live
does well. What it does even better is tracking your testing. The first step is to assign each recipe a proper
code number
(replacing these) and write that on all test specimens and buckets. From this point on, learn. Record every observation you make about each in its notes.
Through all of this, constant use in the studio (or factory) will never stop surfacing problems (e.g.
settling
in the bucket,
crazing
, running,
blistering
, material issues, etc.). The seriousness of each will determine the level of attack. First, identify the
mechanism
of the desired fired result. If it is a
base recipe
plus additions of
colorants
,
opacifiers
or
variegators
, then check if the base of one of the other glazes has a similar surface texture and character. If so, then could the additives in the troublesome one be used with the better base? If not, then it's time to
sanity check
the recipe and bring out the heavy guns of at least looking at the
chemistry
. But in Insight-live, you only need to turn on the display of the
unity formula
(there is nothing else to do). Next, make sure each material in the recipe links to one in the material database (so the calculated formula is accurate). Then compare the calculated unity formula with a
limit formula
(often a simple sanity check, like with the recipe, quickly spots
oxides
that are in excess or are short.
Thursday 4th June 2026
A transparent glaze is going satin:
Is it the feldspar and kaolin substitutions?
A potter reports that a switch from G-200
feldspar
to
Mahavir
, and
EPK
to Imerys
kaolin
, has resulted in this transparent glaze becoming more satin. Is that possible? Yes. Because this glaze is on a
unity formula
tipping point
.
To see it, you do not need to know how to do
glaze chemistry
, just how to display the calculated
unity formulas
side-by-side. My
Insight-live
shows them here. The material change has little effect. But there is an anomaly: 0.29
MgO
. That is
magnesia matte
territory. The MgO is very likely there to help bring the
thermal expansion
as low as possible (to avoid
crazing
). For people who cool their kilns relatively quickly, this fires glossy. But a material change could well affect the
cooling rate
needed to maintain the gloss. That being said, the potter may also be firing slower, yet attributing the mattness to the materials. Or it could be a combination of both.
This is a popular glaze, among others in the book "Mastering Glazes". In Ron Roy's circumstances, and for many others, it is glossy. But for this potter, a small change (in the recipe materials and also likely in firing) has produced this issue.
Context:
MGBase3
,
Tipping point
Thursday 4th June 2026
Alberta Slip as a functional honey-transparent base:
The glaze I reach for again and again
The
functional
surfaces on these pieces all employ the
GA6-B
base honey glaze recipe. On
Plainsman
native
stoneware
clays, especially darker burning ones, typical transparents are very prone to micro-bubble and
clouding
issues. But not this glaze. The likely reason is that
Alberta Slip
contains coarser particles (it is only processed to
42 mesh
), these act as a
fining agent
.
This glaze brings multiple other benefits:
-It fits Plainsman bodies, all of them.
-It is made from materials mined in Canada.
-The
Alberta Slip
base produces a
thixotropic
slurry
.
-It acts as a very good base for dark colors and black.
The top mugs are
GA6-B
inside and out (
MNS
clay body
). The top right has a black
engobe
under it.
Bottom left:
GA6-B
inside,
GA6-C
outside (
MNS
and
Coffee Clay
)
Bottom right:
L4768E
Coffee casting and
M340
casting.
Context:
This GA6-B glaze is..
Thursday 4th June 2026
Are glazes food safe just because they carry a label?
This Gemini-generated mug could conceivably exist yet carry these labels. Yet experienced ceramic technicians would immediately be suspicious. The glaze is highly fluid and heavily crystallized; both suggest low or very low
Al2O3
levels (it is the key oxide that makes glazes durable). If the interior color were produced using a cadmium-containing
encapsulated stain
, cadmium-release testing would be essential before claiming the ware is
food safe
. This is clearly engineered for visual effects rather than
durability
. None of those characteristics prove it is unsafe, but they do mean that labels like "nontoxic" are not substitutes for actual leach testing. A glaze can be made entirely from materials classified as nontoxic and still fail to meet the durability standards expected of
functional
foodware.
Context:
Commercial glazes on decorative..
,
ASTM D-4236 - Standard..
Thursday 4th June 2026
Should I glaze the outside of this mug now? No!
This
bisque
mug has been glazed on the inside. But the bisque has absorbed water from that glaze, and this thin-walled mug is now waterlogged as a result (except at the thicker base). It does not have the absorbency needed to build up a thick enough layer of glaze on the outside. Even if it did, the water from the two glazes would wet the bisque so much that its drying time would be greatly extended. This is a problem because the
mechanism
of attachment of glaze to the body is fragile and works best when the glaze dries quickly. When drying is too very slow,
bubbling
and cracking often occur (leading to
crawling
in the firing).
Context:
Does bisque ware need..
,
Glaze thickness
Monday 1st June 2026
Yixing teapot making. Is it magic?
Or highly evolved craft and science?
The Yixing teapot craftsmen appear to break all the rules and yet produce impossibly delicate and symmetrical pieces. Hao-Tong Yan, one of those craftsmen, and I have been trying to understand the technical reasons for how this amazing craft is possible. It turns out not to be magic, but actually a highly evolved understanding of a very unusual material. Here are some of the things that we are coming to understand (which is making it possible to create a facsimile of the clay in North America).
-The Yixing ore can have the appearance of being like rocks, yet they make a workable
clay body
from it.
-The clay appears highly plastic yet is not; the workability is coming from surprising places.
-The clay is stiff enough to resist deformation, yet is cohesive enough to join seamlessly.
-Craftsmen flatten the clay with a mallet, instead of rolling it, yet it does not stick to the board.
-Sections are simply glued with slip, yet they hold.
-The clay burnishes, yet is not smooth.
-Fired ware is smooth, yet the soft clay appears sandy.
-The fired surface is glossy, yet there is no glaze.
-The fired clay appears super dense yet does have
porosity
.
Context:
Yixing Clay Teapots on..
,
Stunning video of Yixing..
Saturday 30th May 2026
2026: ChatGPT is doing credible troubleshooting
I uploaded a screenshot of this recipe panel from
Insight-live
and asked
ChatGPT
why
sanitaryware
using this glaze is
dunting
. Its response is impressive, good enough to provide remediation ideas.
-It notes things about the recipe that are unusual. For example, that the
Al2O3
of 0.69 and
Si:Al
only 4:1, plus 13%
calcined alumina
, make this glaze more like a
refractory
enamel than a normal glaze.
-Its observation that
crystallization
could mean the real
thermal expansion
may be different from the calculated one, maybe much lower.
-Barium carbonate
decomposition
does not seem like something that would contribute to dunting, but its presence is strange for such a glaze.
Based on its answer, I think the 13%
calcined
alumina is the wild card, which is way too much for any glaze to dissolve, something to deal with first.
Context:
ChatGPT was completely wrong..
,
ChatGPT is surprisingly wrong..
,
Two ChatBots square off..
,
Does ChatGPT know the..
,
Sanitary ware
Tuesday 26th May 2026
Crystalline glazes normally craze:
Here is one way to fix that
The mug on the left, made by Holly McKeen, is a typical cone 10
Grolleg
kaolin
mullite porcelain
(highly
vitrified
, low in residual quartz). Its glaze is
crazed
.
Crystalline glazes
are high in
Na2O
, making
crazing
virtually certain. Since most pieces are decorative, crystal glazers just accept this as part of the process. But these are
functional
mugs, the glaze needs to fit (if only for ware strength).
But what if the
thermal expansion
of the body could be significantly raised? The body on the right is
Crystal Ice
, it contains 40%
silica
(vs 20-25% in a typical
porcelain
). The percentage of Nepheline has been reduced, lowering
vitrification
to about 1.5%
porosity
. As a result, more quartz survives undissolved and less
mullite
develops, raising the body’s thermal expansion. The result is a body with a much higher thermal expansion, so it can not only relieve the glaze tension but actually put a squeeze on it. There is a downside: These are less resistant to
dunting
and
thermal shock
failure during use.
Could the glaze be adjusted instead? Yes. Some of the Na2O could be substituted for
Li2O
, the latter is also a strong melter but has a much lower thermal expansion.
Glaze chemistry
could be used to source it from
Spodumene
(to avoid solubility issues with
lithium carbonate
). However, zinc-silicate
crystalline
glazes are very sensitive systems, so the more lithia is introduced the more likely the effect on the firing window, crystal size/density and background clarity.
Context:
Crystalline glazes
,
Calculated Thermal Expansion
Tuesday 26th May 2026
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy