Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Troubles
Black Coring
Bleeding Colors
Bloating
Casting Slip Problems
Chrome Flashing in Ceramic Glazes
Clouding in Ceramic Glazes
Cracking of Clays During Drying
Crawling
Dunting and Cracking of Clay Bodies During Firing
Foaming of Ceramicd Glaze Slurries
Glaze Blisters
Glaze Crazing
Glaze is Off-Color
Glaze Marks or Scratches
Glaze peeling on drying
Glaze Pinholes, Pitting
Glaze Shivering
Glaze Slurry is Difficult to Use or Settling
Leaking of Fired Ceramics
Lime Popping
Orange Peel Surface
Over Firing of Ceramic Glazes and Bodies
Powdering, Cracking and Settling Glazes
Runny Ceramic Glazes
Specking on Ceramic Ware
Splitting at the Plastic Stage
Staining of Fired Ceramic Glazes
Uneven Glaze Coverage
Warping
Over Firing of Ceramic Glazes and Bodies
Overfiring can happen with glaze, engobes or clay bodies. The problem is more subtle than you might think.
Details
This can happen with bodies,
engobes
or glazes. It can be more subtle than you think. Each type of ceramic is either designed to work at a temperature or simply has been because tradition has proven its suitability there. For
clay bodies
, that temperature may or may not be where it vitrifies. With glazes it is where the glaze is melting to the degree needed to get the physical or aesthetic properties desired. Engobes are delicate and need to be designed with
thermal expansion
and
firing shrinkage
compatible with the underlying body, the needed properties generally exhibit within a narrow temperature range.
Related Information
Some bodies cannot be fired to even near zero porosity
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Bloating
in a high iron raw clay ground to
42 mesh
(
Plainsman
M2
). It is still stable, dense and apparently strong at cone 4 (having 1.1%
porosity
). But at
cone 6
(top bar) it is bloating badly. At
cone 5
the clay experiences the early stages of bloating. Cone 4 is thus "dangerous territory" for this particular clay. A reminder of this can be seen by putting on a transparent glaze - it fills with clouds of
micro-bubbles
from off-gassing that has begun well below cone 4.
Terra cotta gets brittle when over fired
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
An excellent example that demonstrates the brittleness typical of
vitrified
terra cotta
bodies. This bowl was fired to cone 02 and rung like a tuning fork when struck with a spoon. The body is dense like a
porcelain
and at appeared to be incredibly strong (this body is much more
vitreous
than an average terra cotta would be). However after a few more taps with the spoon it broke in two! It is brittle! Very hard, but brittle. At first I thought it might be that the glaze is under compression, but when I dropped the halves they did not shatter in the manner characteristic of compressed glaze, and they broke with razor sharp edges (like a vitrified porcelain does). So firing for this body must stop short of the most dense matrix possible to avoid this brittleness.
Is the V.C. 71 pottery glaze a true matte?
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
The top glaze is V.C. 71, a popular matte
cone 6
glaze used by potters. Bottom is
G2934
matte, a public domain recipe produced by
Plainsman
Clays. The latter is a high-MgO matte, it melts well and does not cutlery mark or stain easily. As evidence that it is a true matte, notice that it is still matte when fired to cone 7 or 8. V.C. 71, while having a similar pleasant silky matte surface at cone 6, converts to a glossy if fired higher. This suggests that the cone 6 matteness is due to incomplete melting. For the same reason, it is whiter in color (as soon as it begins to melt and have depth the color darkens).
This is when you should program a firing yourself
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
This is
Polar Ice
cone 6
porcelain
that has been over fired. The electric kiln was set to do its standard cone 6 fast fire schedule, but a cone in the kiln demonstrates that it fired much higher (perhaps to cone 7 judging by the bend on the cone). This is a
translucent
frit-fluxed porcelain that demands accurate firing, the over fire has produced tiny bubbles and surface dimples in the glaze. The mug rim has also warped to oval shape. The lesson: If you are firing ware that is sensitive to schedule or temperature, use large cones and adjust if needed. If it fires too hot like this, then program to fire to
cone 5
with a longer soak, or cone 5.5 (if possible). Or, program all the steps yourself; that is definitely our preference.
Why is the clay blistering on this figurine?
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
This is an admirable first effort by a budding artist. They used a built-in
cone 6
program on an
electronic controller
equipped electric kiln. But it is overfired. How do we know that? To the right are fired test bars of this clay, they go from cone 4 (top) to cone 8 (bottom). The data sheet of this clay warns not to fire over cone 6. Why? Notice the cone 7 bar has turned to a solid grey and started
blistering
and the cone 8 one is blistering much more. That cone 8 bar is the same color as the figurine (although the colors do not match on the photo). The solution:
Calibrate
the
kiln sitter
by using a
self-supporting cone
.
An example of extreme overfiring of a clay body
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
The lower bar is already
bloating
at
cone 6
. The upper one was fired to
cone 10 reduction
.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy