Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Troubles
Black Coring
Bleeding Colors
Bloating
Casting Slip Problems
Chrome Flashing in Ceramic Glazes
Clouding in Ceramic Glazes
Cracking of Clays During Drying
Crawling
Dunting and Cracking of Clay Bodies During Firing
Foaming of Ceramicd Glaze Slurries
Glaze Blisters
Glaze Crazing
Glaze is Off-Color
Glaze Marks or Scratches
Glaze peeling on drying
Glaze Pinholes, Pitting
Glaze Shivering
Glaze Slurry is Difficult to Use or Settling
Leaking of Fired Ceramics
Lime Popping
Orange Peel Surface
Over Firing of Ceramic Glazes and Bodies
Powdering, Cracking and Settling Glazes
Runny Ceramic Glazes
Specking on Ceramic Ware
Splitting at the Plastic Stage
Staining of Fired Ceramic Glazes
Uneven Glaze Coverage
Warping
Glaze peeling on drying
Happens as clay-containing glazes shrink during drying on the bisque ware, first cracking then pulling away.
Details
A common problem with
dipping glazes
. Glazes contain clay, so they shrink when they dry. There is a mechanical bond between the drying glaze and the
bisque
body (surface roughness provides a place for it to hang on). But, when
drying shrinkage
is too great, the bond can be compromised, producing cracks (and subsequent
crawling
in the firing). But, if shrinkage continues as it dries further, the glaze can actually peel away.
Related Information
This pottery glaze is peeling when multi-layered:
The recipe reveals why.
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Dipping glazes
can, in very controlled circumstances, be
multi-layered
. If you have done it for some time, with success, you may have been just lucky. These pieces demonstrate one of many factors that can produce failure: The top glaze contains 7%
bentonite
and 5%
zinc oxide
- that is 12% hyper-fine particles, perfect to create the
drying shrinkage
to make this happen. The recipe author must have reasoned that it could "pinch hit" for the inadequate clay content. But 7% bentonite in any glaze is highly unusual. And, it is actually not even necessary here. Why? The high percentage of Ferro
Frit 3124
is sourcing needless
Al
2
O
3
(alumina), that should be coming from
kaolin
or
ball clay
instead.
Frit 3134
is the perfect stand-in, it contains almost no Al
2
O
3
, but otherwise is quite similar. The equivalent recipe we calculated on the right has the same
chemistry
, but does pass a
sanity check
. It is not guaranteed to work, but has a better chance than this one. For even more assurance of success, it should be mixed as a
base-coat dipping glaze
.
Shrinking glaze = peeling, cracking glaze
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Layered
dipping glazes
usually peel like this because they contain clay and shrink as they dry (the fact that all of them don't do this is actually amazing). Success, even with single layering, is a matter of the shrinkage being low enough, the drying being fast enough, the layer being thin enough, the
bisque
being absorbent enough, the
water content
being low enough and the bond with the bisque being good enough. Glazes with high clay content (including Gerstley or
Gillespie Borate
), thick applications or
multi-layering
are the main offenders.
Thixotropic
slurries apply most evenly and are least likely to go on too thick. Dipping glazes having 15-20%
kaolin
or
ball clay
are easiest to
slurry up
and have the best application and drying properties. Mixing base layers as
first-coat dipping
glazes is also important.
The problem with this piece: The addition of 7.5%
bentonite
to make up for the otherwise low raw clay content in the recipe produced a recipe that does not pass a
sanity check
. When that was replaced with kaolin it worked. There is a crowbar approach to fix these without any other changes: Add
CMC gum
(e.g. 1%) to make them
brushing glazes
(if you don't mind long drying times).
Links
Troubles
Crawling
Ask yourself the right questions to figure out the real cause of a
glaze crawling
issue. Deal with the problem, not the symptoms.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy