Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Troubles
Black Coring
Bleeding Colors
Bloating
Casting Slip Problems
Chrome Flashing in Ceramic Glazes
Clouding in Ceramic Glazes
Cracking of Clays During Drying
Crawling
Dunting and Cracking of Clay Bodies During Firing
Foaming of Ceramicd Glaze Slurries
Glaze Blisters
Glaze Crazing
Glaze is Off-Color
Glaze Marks or Scratches
Glaze peeling on drying
Glaze Pinholes, Pitting
Glaze Shivering
Glaze Slurry is Difficult to Use or Settling
Leaking of Fired Ceramics
Lime Popping
Orange Peel Surface
Over Firing of Ceramic Glazes and Bodies
Powdering, Cracking and Settling Glazes
Runny Ceramic Glazes
Specking on Ceramic Ware
Splitting at the Plastic Stage
Staining of Fired Ceramic Glazes
Uneven Glaze Coverage
Warping
Orange Peel Surface
Orange peel is a defect or physical property of ceramic glazes
Details
Ceramic glazes can have a surface texture like
orange peel
, this can be intentional or a defect. Matte glazes, depending on their
mechanism
, can have a smooth but dull or a bumpy but glossy surface (the bumps are very fine and scatter the light to produce a silky matteness). Variegated glazes having phase differences can also have an
orange-peel
surface. Glazes with significant entrained bubbles and those not sufficiently melted can also have a rougher peel surface.
Assuming the glaze is sufficiently melted, a firing cycle having a slower cool can help level the surface of glossy glazes. If better melting is needed the recipe can be adjusted to have more fluxing
oxides
. Adding some
frit
can really help (e.g.
Frit 3195
has
balanced chemistry
and will often help melt glazes with minimal impact on other properties). If the glaze also has issues with
crazing
Ferro
Frit 3249
(or equivalent) can help solve both problems. If the rough surface is caused by excessive gas bubbles being generated during firing then adjusting the glaze recipe to source the
chemistry
from materials having a lower
LOI
can really help (e.g.
Gerstley Borate
and
frits
both source
B
2
O
3
but the former has a very high
LOI
). Carbonate materials can generate lots of orange peel producing bubbles at the wrong time. Strangely enough,
stains
can be a source of bubbles also, try a different one to be sure. If the body is gassing then a
drop-and-hold
at the end of the firing will really help. Slow cool from there will help even more. If the glaze has a stiff melt (e.g. is high in
Al
2
O
3
) the chemistry can be adjusted to raise the
SiO
2
and drop the Al
2
O
3
. High
MgO
glazes naturally have an orange peel surface (MgO is from
talc
and
dolomite
). That being said, some MgO can be tolerated, in ultra gloss surfaces, but when a threshold is reached surface texture is affected.
Sometimes the best approach is to transplant the fired mechanism-producing materials in the recipe (the ones giving the color,
variegation
and
opacity
) into another
base transparent
that works well on your
clay bodies
.
This will resolve another possible issue: A bad shipment of frit. A different clear base that uses a different frit would be a good test to verify that.
Related Information
A honey glaze that needs a base having more melt fluidity
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
This transparent glaze adds a little manganese and iron, just enough to give color, but still maintain transparency to highlight the decorative crack-network in the
engobe
below. However this glaze is not as brilliant and transparent as it could be. As apparent in the surface reflections, it has somewhat of an "
orange peel
" texture on the glass surface. This is due to a combination of factors (e.g. not enough
melt fluidity
, gassing of the manganese during melting, cooling the kiln too quickly). If the
colorants
were transplanted into a more
fluid-melt
transparent, this glaze could be improved. Photo courtesy of J. Decker.
Orange-peel or pebbly glaze surface. Why?
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
This is a cone 10
glossy glaze
. It has the
chemistry
that suggests it should be crystal clear and smooth. But there are multiple issues with the materials supplying that chemistry:
Strontium carbonate
,
talc
and
calcium carbonate
. Each has a significant
LOI
and produces gases
decomposition
. When the gases need to come out at the wrong time it turns the glaze into a Swiss cheeze of
micro-bubbles
. A study to isolate which of these three materials is the problem might make it possible to adjust the firing to accommodate it. But probably not. The most obvious solution is to just use non-gassing sources
MgO
,
SrO
,
CaO
and
BaO
(which will require some calculation). There is a good reason to do this: The glaze contains some
boron frit
, that is likely kick-starting melting much earlier than a standard raw-material-only cone 10 glaze. That
fluid melt
may not only be trapping gases from the body but creating a perfect environment to trap all the bubbles coming out of those carbonates and talc. All of this being said, a
drop and hold
firing schedule
could also smooth it out a lot.
Zircopax as a fining agent to de-bubble a stained glaze
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
The cone 03
porcelain
cup on the left has 10% Cerdec
encapsulated stain
239416 in the
G2931K
clear base (this is not an
underglaze
with a transparent over it). The surface is badly orange-peeled because the glass is full of
micro-bubbles
that developed during the firing. Notice that the insides of the cups are crystal-clear, no bubbles. So here, they are a direct product of the presence of the stain. The glaze on the right has even more stain, 15%. Why isn't it even worse? It also has a 3% addition of
Zircopax
(
zircon
), which acts as a
fining agent
. As you can see, this makes a dramatic difference. Suppliers of encapsulated
stains
even recommend a zircon addition, but are often unclear about why. This is the reason.
The yellow on the right could be improved further with a slow-cool or
drop-and-hold
firing. And if the glaze was reformulated to use a later melting
frit
(so fewer bubbles even get trapped).
Glaze with an encapsulated stain is bubbling. It needs Zircopax.
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
These two pieces are fired at
cone 6
. The
base transparent
glaze is the same -
G2926B
Plainsman
transparent. The amount of encapsulated red stain is the same (11% Mason 6021 Dark Red). But two things are different. Number 1: 2%
Zircopax
(
zircon
) has been added to the upper glaze. The stain manufacturers recommend this, saying that it makes for a brighter color. However, that is not what we see here. What we do see is the particles of unmelting zircon acting as seeds and collection points for the bubbles (the larger ones produced are escaping). Number 2: The
firing schedule
. The top one has been fired to approach cone 6 and 100F/hr, held for five minutes at
2200F
(cone 6 as verified in our kiln by cones), dropped quickly to 2100F and held for 30 minutes.
Links
Glossary
Drop-and-Soak Firing
A kiln
firing schedule
where temperature is eased to the top, then dropped quickly and held at a temperature 100-200F lower.
Firing Schedules
Plainsman Cone 6 Drop-and-hold, Slow Cool
350F/hr to 2100F, 108/hr to 2200, hold 10 minutes, fastdrop to 2100, hold 30 minutes, 150/hr to 1400
Materials
Copper Carbonate Basic
This form of
copper carbonate
is the article of commerce, a mixture of theoretical copper carbonate and copper hydroxide.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy