Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Troubles
Black Coring
Bleeding Colors
Bloating
Casting Slip Problems
Chrome Flashing in Ceramic Glazes
Clouding in Ceramic Glazes
Cracking of Clays During Drying
Crawling
Dunting and Cracking of Clay Bodies During Firing
Foaming of Ceramicd Glaze Slurries
Glaze Blisters
Glaze Crazing
Glaze is Off-Color
Glaze Marks or Scratches
Glaze peeling on drying
Glaze Pinholes, Pitting
Glaze Shivering
Glaze Slurry is Difficult to Use or Settling
Leaking of Fired Ceramics
Lime Popping
Orange Peel Surface
Over Firing of Ceramic Glazes and Bodies
Powdering, Cracking and Settling Glazes
Runny Ceramic Glazes
Specking on Ceramic Ware
Splitting at the Plastic Stage
Staining of Fired Ceramic Glazes
Uneven Glaze Coverage
Warping
Chrome Flashing in Ceramic Glazes
The development of chrome tin pinks is a combination of the stain and the right chemistry in the host glaze. Unwanted pink flashing occurs where there is a hostile chemistry in the glaze.
Details
Close your eyes and imagine a nice pink pastel glaze. Now imagine that you wanted a nice white instead! During the ACerS convention in St. Louis I attended an eye-opening presentation by Stan Sulewski of Pfalzgraff (they are a well known
porcelain
table ware manufacturer in the US). After hearing what he said I came to better appreciate the synergy between
chemistry
and
physical properties
involved with glaze
opacity
and color. Potters absorbed in reactive and
artware
glazes often forget how difficult it can be to make a proper white semi-gloss
food-safe
glaze.
Engineers at the company faced a dilemma:
The tin opacified glaze flashes pink because chrome used in the darker colored glazed ware volatilizes and reacts with the tin to form chrome tin pink hues in the white.
The
zircon
opacified glaze had excessive metal marking.
Refractory
and angular zircon particles protrude from the surface when their population is too high (even when particle size is very fine).
The obvious solutions of dedicating a kiln to non-chrome-bearing wear or eliminating chrome containing glazes were not feasible. Thus the objective was clear: Adjust the recipe of the tin glaze to have low metal marking and white color without pink
flashing
.
The first and most obvious approach of simply blending tin and zircon would address the marking problem but the pink colors of course remained because tin is so sensitive to chrome. Impossible as it may seem, they actually found an answer using ceramic chemistry.
If you have ever worked with chrome tin
stains
you likely know that unless the chemistry of the host glaze is right the color does not develop. Getting the color to work can be a real challenge but in this case they actually wanted to sabotage it! Among warnings on stain manufacturers chrome-tin data sheets are mentions of the detrimental effects of zinc, raw alumina, magnesia and a lack of calcia. They reasoned that it should be possible to solve this problem by making the host
glaze chemistry
hostile to the development of chrome tin pinks. And that is what they did.
Zinc, the most obvious choice, did kill the pink but it also imparted a yellow brown color, that would not do. The presence of adequate
CaO
is critical to the development of pink and
MgO
is detrimental. While both are fluxes a complete replacement was not practical. Glazes tolerate and usually benefit from relatively large amounts of CaO, but complete replacement with MgO or
SrO
(or even a mix) produces much different surfaces and less active melting.
The critical factor, as implied above, is that if calcium is not present in a threshold minimum amount chrome tin pink colors can be completely absent. Thus the answer turned out to be a compromise: An MgO/SrO mix (with more MgO) replacing much of the CaO. This preserved the surface character and killed the pink.
However the white color was compromised just a little so a final adjustment was done: a small amount of blue stain was added to brighten the white.
There you have it, ceramic chemistry to the rescue again! However the story is not quite over, they still need to adjust things to better match the
thermal expansion
of the new glaze with the old.
Related Information
Links
Articles
Formulating a Clear Glaze Compatible with Chrome-Tin Stains
In
ceramics
color is often a matter of
chemistry
, that is, the host glaze must be compatible and have a sympathetic chemistry for the stain being added. Chrome-tin
stains
are a classic example.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy