Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Troubles
Black Coring
Bleeding Colors
Bloating
Casting Slip Problems
Chrome Flashing in Ceramic Glazes
Clouding in Ceramic Glazes
Cracking of Clays During Drying
Crawling
Dunting and Cracking of Clay Bodies During Firing
Foaming of Ceramicd Glaze Slurries
Glaze Blisters
Glaze Crazing
Glaze is Off-Color
Glaze Marks or Scratches
Glaze peeling on drying
Glaze Pinholes, Pitting
Glaze Shivering
Glaze Slurry is Difficult to Use or Settling
Leaking of Fired Ceramics
Lime Popping
Orange Peel Surface
Over Firing of Ceramic Glazes and Bodies
Powdering, Cracking and Settling Glazes
Runny Ceramic Glazes
Specking on Ceramic Ware
Splitting at the Plastic Stage
Staining of Fired Ceramic Glazes
Uneven Glaze Coverage
Warping
Glaze Slurry is Difficult to Use or Settling
Understanding glaze slurry rheology is the key to solving problems and creating a suspension that does not settle out, applies well, dries crack free.
Details
We often tend to put so much effort into adjusting our glazes to fine-tune fired properties that we tolerate poor application properties. Such glazes are not only frustrating to use, but they often produce poor fired results. When a
slurry
is right it should 'gel' and 'hang on'. You should be able to dip your finger in and pull it out with an even coverage and
no drips
. In fact, a
thixotropic
glaze will resist shedding off ware covered with
wax emulsion
! And it will not settle out hard in the container! Yes, there is no reason to put up with a glaze that drips and drips, cracks on drying, dusts and does not produce an even layer (yes, these 
problems are all related).
In industry, maintaining the 'rheology' (flow properties) of the glaze slurry through material, water quality, seasonal, and personnel changes is often the most difficult challenge a factory faces. Maintenance of the
specific gravity
in particular is a reference point, 'an anchor' around which all other adjustments hinge (if your glaze is working well, measure its
specific gravity
now). If your glazes application or drying properties are often problematic or they are always difficult to work with, read on, recipe change(s) might be most appropriate. Be careful about using glaze additives, try all the other approaches first.
Gel Your Glaze, Adjust its Recipe to Gel
The glaze slurry must be
thixotropic
, it must "gel" so that the
mechanism
of its
initial adherence to the ware is, to a considerable extent, a function of this property
rather than absorption of water by porous
bisque
. While thixotropic behavior can be
achieved by using glaze additives, most people lack the experience, knowledge, 
equipment and circumstances to use
them properly. It is thus desirable to avoid additives if possible and try to select a
kaolin
or
ball clay
that contributes thixotropic properties.
EPK
(kaolin) is a good
example. If your glaze does not contain adequate kaolin (15-20%) then use ceramic calculations
(e.g.
Digitalfire INSIGHT
) to adjust it so that it does. How is this possible? Because
ceramic
chemistry
sees materials as 'oxide contributors' and it is thus possible to
supply a specific chemistry from different mixtures of materials.
It is possible to have
20% kaolin
in
cone 04
glazes
if you use low alumina
boron
frits
. At higher temperatures glazes have significantly more
Al
2
O
3
and
SiO
2
and so it is usually easy to achieve a 25% kaolin content (because it
contributes Al
2
O
3
and SiO
2
). 
However there are many high temperature glazes that have large percentages of
feldspar
, 
sometimes 70%! In such the feldspar is supplying all of the needed Al
2
O
3
and so there is
little room for clay in the recipe. These glazes are evil and there is no need for this.
The simplest way to fix this problem is use ceramic calculations to reduce the feldspar
and supply the
alkali
oxides
from other sources. This will enable you to increase the kaolin
to supply the lost Al
2
O
3
(from the feldspar reduction). Ferro
Frit 3110
is a good example
of a
frit
that is very similar to a feldspar in chemistry, but it has very low alumina.
Consider What Materials You Are Using
Different clays produce slurries of differing properties. Bentonite-like materials
have the ability to gel in water in small amounts, they will help suspend the other
particles better than any other material. However bentonites gel the water and hold onto it 
	so well that using any more than 5% will cause glazes dry too slowly and shrink too much. Ball clay
is better, 20% of it in a recipe can produce a nice slurry, and many people prefer its
characteristics. However ball clay glazes do not necessarily gel well (and ball clay
introduces more iron than you might want). If you have a kaolin that suspends well, it is
the ideal material. In North American, EPK, for example, produces very nice slurries that
suspend well and gel to help them hold on immediately after the dip. Experiment with
the kaolins and ball clays available to you to find the best one.
Some materials are soluble or partially soluble, this is even the case 
	with some frits (which are of course not intended for glazes). When 
	materials dissolve in the glaze they introduce electrolytes into the water 
	which in turn can affect the
viscosity
of the glaze. For example, high 
	nepheline syenite glazes can thicken over time and each time you add water 
	to re thin the glaze shrinks and cracks more during drying on the ware. High 
	boron materials are often soluble. Clays, especially raw and native clays, 
	often contain soluble
sulfates
that can dramatically affect the slurry. 
	These problems can be insidious because these materials often dissolve 
	slowly overtime and thus the
rheology
will change accordingly. Admittedly, 
	companies with a continuous production line can use slightly soluble 
	materials since their glaze is used quickly and is not stored.
Dense Bisque Ware
Bisque ware should not be too high in
porosity
. Variable porosity means variable thicknesses in
the overlying glaze. Porous bisque ware demands that glaze slurries be thin and runny or
the application will be too thick. If you are used to
bisque firing
from cone 010 to 06,
go to
04 or higher
if you can and use a more gelled glaze.
Use Additives Only if Absolutely Necessary
Misuse of glaze additives is very common because they are not nearly as well understood
as other materials. Often they are listed in recipes in which they are not really needed. They
should be avoided if possible, because they often have detrimental side effects. Remember,
although you might think your glaze needs them, does it really? Only all-fritted glazes
with very low kaolin normally need additives in typical traditional ceramic applications
(an exception is
crystalline glazes
that require a low alumina content). Many people use
additives that actually worsen the application properties of their glazes. In 
these cases, often a recipe adjustment to increase clay content (by sourcing the same chemistry 
from a different set of materials) or a simple
bentonite
addition would be much 
better (i.e. gum additions may give a thinner applying, slower drying, 'drippy' 
glaze). Again, do not use an additive if it is not
needed, additives are not a substitute for a good glaze recipe.
Individual additives often defy easy classification because they claim to 
impart
suspending
, adhesive and
flow properties. Thus picking the right one is a matter of discerning the need and using
the additive that 'emphasizes' the needed slurry property and gives the fewest side
effects (i.e. color change, slow drying rate, biodegradation, film formation). I might add
that it is also common to use much more of an additive than is needed, normally completely ruining
glaze slurry properties.
While gum does form a gel to suspend particles, it is usually more useful in making the
slurry 'sticky', and acts as a temporary glue to cement otherwise loosely adhered
particles; thus it is referred to as a 'binder', 'hardener', 'adhesive'. Remember that the
mechanism of glaze adherence is normally simply contact, it 'hangs on' to irregularities
in the surface by virtue of its own strength. Thus a harder dry glaze layer will adhere
better. Note also that clays can impart both dry hardness plus
suspension
and gelling
properties to the slurry, whereas gums usually only harden it. Starches usually act as
hardeners and may thicken the slurry (therefore suspending it better). Cellulose ethers
are used like gum and starch to harden and thicken, they are said to be more consistent
and easier to control. Claylike plasticizers (like Veegum) can impart similar claylike
properties to a slurry, but remember that the beneficial properties of kaolin, for
example, come largely from having alot of it in the recipe. Bentonite clay, likewise, can
be beneficial but only in amounts small enough that prevent it from slowing down the drying
significantly. So generally clay-like additives have these same limitations. Other
additives include wetting agents, foam control agents and sealers. People who know how to
use these materials can do things with glaze that others might think impossible. Likewise,
those of us who do not know how to use them can create a real mess. Manufacturers usually
have instructions so do not buy these materials without good instructions.
Flocculants, Deflocculants
Electrolytes change the pH of the suspension and affect the charge of particles
(this changing slurry viscosity); a few drops can make a thick slurry very runny and thin
(deflocculating it), or make a thin one gel (
flocculating
it). Thus deflocculants/deflocculants can be
used to adjust otherwise variable flow properties. But this cannot be done by a novice.
The amounts required are generally extremely small and must be tuned to the specific batch
by careful measurements (a few drops too much can literally turn your glaze into jelly 
or make it settle like a rock). It is
amazing how much a small amount of a flocculant, such as calcium chloride,
epsom salts
, or
vinegar can gel a glaze (so it makes sense to test on a small amount before adding it to a
whole batch). At the risk of being repetitive, please consider: if you need to use these
materials is it possible that adjusting the recipe to increase the clay or remove soluble
materials (e.g. boric acid,
nepheline syenite
,
lithium carbonate
) would be a better
approach. One real downside of these materials is they can put a glaze batch on a
roller coaster viscosity ride, even with powerful mixing equipment to try stabilize their
action. Do you really want that?
Mixing
If you are storing your glaze slurries it is very beneficial to have a mixer 
that can put alot of energy into the slurry to thoroughly wet the surfaces of 
all particles during primary mixing. After this, final adjustments with water 
content and possible additives can be done to establish the final
rheological
properties. When this is done the glaze slurry will be more stable for a longer 
period of time.
Conclusion
My general advice is this: If your glaze is not suspending, hardening, gelling 
or applying
properly, then, if possible reformulate it to have more clay, especially kaolin. If it still
needs help then add bentonite (up to 3%). If the glaze still needs extra
help, then use an additive, but beware. If there are still problems, then, heaven forbid,
use a flocculant or deflocculant or study up on other more exotic additives!
Related Information
Will a bentonite slurry addition suspend a glaze?
Not like you might have been told.
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
This is 50g of sodium
bentonite
in 1 gallon of water (~0.5% concentration). Sodium bentonite creates a gel that resists mixing. With a better propeller, faster mixer, hot water, slow addition, etc. we might be able to achieve 1% (or ~100g/gallon). Mud-men (drilling mud mixers) claim 4% is possible using shear pumps, ribbon blenders, or paddle mixers - that seems impossible to me! Why does all this matter? Some say that a gel like this can be added to a
settling
glaze to fix it. Is that true? Not really. Here is why. Our typical imperial gallon of
dipping glaze
contains 3500g powder (US gallon 2800g). At least 1% bentonite, or 35g, is needed to make any difference. The more typical 2% would be 70g. If you have a great mixer and can make a
slurry
having double the concentration of this one, then to deliver the minimum bentonite for a gallon of the glaze would require 1/3 gallon of this! While the added bentonite might help somewhat, the effects of all that extra water will cancel the benefits.
The ball clay you use to suspend your glaze is important!
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
I poured 4 teaspoons of two glazes onto a non-absorbent butcher’s board and let them sit for a minute, then inclined the board. The one on the right employs Gleason
Ball clay
, the left one has Old Hickory #5 ball clay. Neither has any
rheology
modifier additions. The one on the right has
settled
and, on incline of the board, the watery upper is running off. The other has gelled and the whole thing is running downward slowly. Below that you can see where I have begun to sponge them off, the one on the right is sticky. The most amazing thing about this: This difference appears despite the fact that there is only 7% ball clay in this heavily
fritted
recipe.
Links
Articles
Understanding Glaze Slurry Properties
It is possible to have a glaze
slurry
that is a joy to use, but only if you understand the
physics
of the materials in the glaze recipe.
Tests
Rheology of a Ceramic Slurry
Materials
EP Kaolin
A
kaolin
that gels slurries (thus handy to suspend ceramic glazes). It is plastic and fires white enough that it is also valuable in
porcelain
bodies.
Glossary
Feldspar Glazes
Feldspar
is a natural mineral that, by itself, is the most similar to a high temperature
stoneware
glaze. Thus it is common to see alot of it in
glaze recipes
. Actually, too much.
Glossary
Ceramic Glaze Defects
Ceramic glaze defects
include things like
pinholes
,
blisters
,
crazing
,
shivering
,
leaching
,
crawling
,
cutlery marking
,
clouding
and color problems.
Troubles
Powdering, Cracking and Settling Glazes
Powdering and dusting glazes are difficult and a dust hazard. Shrinking and cracking glazes fall off and
crawl
. The cause is the wrong amount or type of clay.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy