Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Troubles
Black Coring
Bleeding Colors
Bloating
Casting Slip Problems
Chrome Flashing in Ceramic Glazes
Clouding in Ceramic Glazes
Cracking of Clays During Drying
Crawling
Dunting and Cracking of Clay Bodies During Firing
Foaming of Ceramicd Glaze Slurries
Glaze Blisters
Glaze Crazing
Glaze is Off-Color
Glaze Marks or Scratches
Glaze peeling on drying
Glaze Pinholes, Pitting
Glaze Shivering
Glaze Slurry is Difficult to Use or Settling
Leaking of Fired Ceramics
Lime Popping
Orange Peel Surface
Over Firing of Ceramic Glazes and Bodies
Powdering, Cracking and Settling Glazes
Runny Ceramic Glazes
Specking on Ceramic Ware
Splitting at the Plastic Stage
Staining of Fired Ceramic Glazes
Uneven Glaze Coverage
Warping
Leaking of Fired Ceramics
Details
This problem is often called "weeping", or just "leaking". To guarantee water tightness a clay needs to be
vitrified
to be dense, thus have a low
porosity
(typically less than 1%). If a glaze is not
crazed
this problem should never happen (since moisture cannot pass through glass). Many stonewares have porosities above 2%, thus water penetration will happen when glazes do not seal well. The
SHAB test
can be used to monitor body porosity.
The lower the firing temperature of a
clay body
, the more likely it will be to leak water.
Terra cotta
bodies have from 10-15% porosity when fired at cone 06-04.
Feldspar
can be added to
stoneware
and
porcelain
bodies to vitrify them down to about
cone 5
, below that low melting clays (usually red burning) can make dense bodies at a lower temperature (down to about
cone 1
). Some light-burning clay deposits contain natural feldspar, these can
mature
quite low also, cone 4 or even lower.
Well melted glazes that fit (do not
craze
or
shiver
) can seal any body against water penetration regardless of its porosity. However, if glaze
thermal expansion
is not well matched to the body, even if ware exits the kiln uncrated, over time glazes will craze and thus provide a channel for ware passage. Even if the glaze is well fitted, some porous bodies are subject to expansion when they absorb moisture (such as a piece having an unglazed foot that permits water to wick up into the walls). Glazes are most difficult to fit at lower temperatures because they don't bond as well with the body and need more
flux
to melt and the most useful fluxes have high
thermal expansions
.
Related Information
Silicone sealers prevent water absorbing in porous ceramic
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
The right side of this
bisque-fired
clay bar (which has about 15%
porosity
) has been surface-treated with a
silicone sealant
. It repels the water, the drop rolls around on the surface if I tilt the bar. The drop on the left side absorbed into the clay in seconds.
The high porosity of this clay enables sealing against water leakage
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
This body has high
porosity
, almost 25%. It is
L4410P
, a dolomite-based
low-fire
whiteware
,
Plainsman
Clays makes this as a product named "
Snow
". But this high porosity has some advantages, one of them is that it soaks up
silicone sealer
well. The
slip-cast
piece on the left was sealed (you can see the surface sheen) and it is impermeable to water penetration (the glaze is not
crazed
so water cannot penetrate there either). The piece on the right soaks up water readily (on the lower unglazed portion). Sealing this specific body is doubly important because the
dolomite
particles within can rehydrate over time, especially in damp climates, causing pieces to crack. Even the foot rings of
functional
pieces should be sealed, not just to prevent hydration but also waterlogging.
Water can leak through a stoneware clay body
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
The unglazed
stoneware
mug on the right has 2.5%
porosity
at
cone 6
(according to an
SHAB test
). It is stoneware and it is strong and durable. But the fact that a porosity can be measured demonstrates that water should be able to pass through it (as shown in this 24-hour test on a piece of paper). The left one has 1% porosity. While theoretically water still should be able to pass, bodies with this level of
vitrification
normally do not leak. The point: A non-crazing glaze is needed for water tightness for the body on the right. This is not a problem, bodies having far more porosity than this are routinely used in industry, if the inside glaze fits they don’t leak.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy