Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Troubles
Black Coring
Bleeding Colors
Bloating
Casting Slip Problems
Chrome Flashing in Ceramic Glazes
Clouding in Ceramic Glazes
Cracking of Clays During Drying
Crawling
Dunting and Cracking of Clay Bodies During Firing
Foaming of Ceramicd Glaze Slurries
Glaze Blisters
Glaze Crazing
Glaze is Off-Color
Glaze Marks or Scratches
Glaze peeling on drying
Glaze Pinholes, Pitting
Glaze Shivering
Glaze Slurry is Difficult to Use or Settling
Leaking of Fired Ceramics
Lime Popping
Orange Peel Surface
Over Firing of Ceramic Glazes and Bodies
Powdering, Cracking and Settling Glazes
Runny Ceramic Glazes
Specking on Ceramic Ware
Splitting at the Plastic Stage
Staining of Fired Ceramic Glazes
Uneven Glaze Coverage
Warping
Splitting at the Plastic Stage
Pottery clays can split at the plastic stage, sometimes ware can fall down right in front of your eyes. Why?
Details
If
clay bodies
are made from too high a percentage of plastic materials they shrink too much during drying and crack. Thus it is common to incorporate aggregate materials, like
silica sand
, fine group, kaolinized sands or silts, the reduce the
plasticity
and cut the
drying shrinkage
. However, each grain of sand exposed at the surface during
throwing
is an opportunity for water to enter and begin a tiny split (that can grow to the point of failure if the clay is still soft enough). This problem is exacerbated when the plastic clays being employed are not fine ground and thus themselves contain a range of
particle sizes
above
200 mesh
. The principle preventive action is to avoid situations where water or wet slip are left sitting on any surface that has been stretched or is under tensile stress (like the outer belly of a vase or where alterations are done). It is also helpful to use slip rather than water in forming processes.
Bodies having this issue can be improved by deairing during pugging. Or
bentonite
can be added to the recipe, it blocks the penetration of water and strengthens the plastic phase. Increasing the percentage of plastics at the cost of particulates in the body recipe will also help.
Related Information
Why do some clays split like this on throwing or forming?
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
An example of
splitting
, where a
thrown
clay develops a split minutes after
throwing
. This often happens at stretch-points with sandy or groggy
clay bodies
or those that have a wide range of
particle sizes
(e.g. native clays not ground to
200 mesh
). The larger particles create networks into which water can penetrate and begin and propagate a split. It is thus wise not to leave water or high-water-content slip on any surfaces experiencing tensile stress during forming.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy