Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Hazards
Alumina Toxicology
|
Ammonia and Latex Toxicity
|
Antimony Oxide
|
Are colored porcelains hazardous?
|
Arsenic Oxide
|
Asbestos Toxicity
|
Ball Clay
|
BARIUM and COMPOUNDS Toxicology
|
Barium Carbonate in Clay Bodies
|
Barium Carbonate in Glazes
|
Bentonite Toxicity
|
Beryllium Monoxide Toxicology
|
Bismuth Trioxide Toxicology
|
Boron Compounds and Their Toxicity
|
Brown Stain
|
Cadmium Toxicity
|
Calcium Carbonate Toxicology
|
Carbon Monoxide Toxicity
|
Cesium Toxicology
|
Chromium Compounds Toxicology
|
Clay Toxicity
|
Cobalt Oxide and Carbonate
|
Cobalt Toxicology
|
Copper Compounds Toxicology
|
Copper Oxide and Carbonate
|
Cristobalite Toxicity
|
Cryolite and Ceramics
|
Dealing With Dust in Ceramics
|
Diatomaceous Earth Toxicology
|
Dioxins in Clays
|
Epsom Salts
|
Eye Injuries Due to Radiation
|
Feldspar
|
Fighting Micro-Organisms in Ceramics
|
Fluorine Gas
|
Fumes from gas kilns
|
Gallium Oxide Toxicology
|
Hafnium Oxide Toxicty
|
Hydrofluoric Acid Toxicity
|
Iron oxide and Hematite
|
Lead Chromate
|
Lead in Ceramic Glazes
|
Lead Toxicology
|
Lithium Carbonate Toxicity
|
Lithium Toxicology
|
Man-Made Vitreous Fibers (MMVF) Toxicology
|
Man-Made Vitreous Fibers Safety Update
|
Manganese and Parkinsons by Jane Watkins
|
Manganese in Clay Bodies
|
Manganese Inorganic Compounds Toxicology
|
Manganese Toxicity by Elke Blodgett
|
Manganese: Creativity and Illness by Dierdre O'Reilly
|
Molybdenum Compounds Toxicology
|
Nickel Compounds Toxicity
|
Niobium Oxide Toxicity
|
Occupational Dermatoses
|
Overview of Material Safety by Gavin Stairs
|
Paraffin Toxicology
|
Perlite Toxicity
|
Plant Ash Toxicity
|
Potassium Carbonate Toxicity
|
Pregnancy and Ceramics
|
Propane Toxicology
|
Quartz Toxicity
|
Quartz Toxicity on Clayart
|
Rare Earth Compounds Toxicity
|
Rubidium and Cesium Toxicology
|
Rutile Toxicology
|
Silicosis and Screening
|
Silver Compounds Toxicology
|
Sodium Azide Toxicology
|
Sodium Carbonate Toxicology
|
Sodium Silicate Powder Toxicology
|
Stannous Chloride Toxicity
|
Strontium Carbonate Toxicity Note
|
Sulfur Dioxide Toxicity
|
Talc Hazards Overview
|
Talc Toxicology
|
Thallium Oxide Toxicology
|
Thorium Dioxide Toxicity
|
Tin Inorganic Compounds
|
Titanium Dioxide Toxicology
|
Toxicological Assessment of Zeolites
|
Tungsten Compounds Toxicology
|
Understanding Acronyms on MSDS's
|
Uranium and Ceramics
|
Vanadium and Compounds Toxicology
|
Vermiculite
|
Zinc Compounds Toxicology
|
Zirconium Compounds Toxicity
|
Zirconium Encapsulated Stains Toxicity
Carbon Monoxide Toxicity
On this page : Carbon Monoxide by 
   Edouard Bastarache,
Introduction
,
Sources of 
   exposure
,
Toxicological 
   properties
,
Biological 
   parameter
,
Hygiene & 
   Safety
,
Prevention
,
Protection 
   measures
,
Exposure 
   Standards
,
First 
   Aid
,
The Author
Introduction 
   :
Carbon monoxide (CO) is a colourless, 
   odourless gas that can be poisonous to humans. It is a product of 
   the incomplete combustion of carbon-containing fuels and is also 
   produced by natural processes or by biotransformation of 
   halomethanes within the human body. With external exposure to 
   additional carbon monoxide, subtle effects can begin to occur, and 
   exposure to higher levels can result in death. The health effects 
   of carbon monoxide are largely the result of the formation of 
   carboxyhemoglobin (COHb), which impairs the oxygen carrying 
   capacity of the blood.
Carbon monoxide (CO) is an odourless gas 
   without irritating properties, which allows the inhalation of 
   significant and potentially lethal concentrations without warning 
   symptoms for the victim. CO intoxication is each year one of the 
   main causes of mortality by intoxication in industrialized 
   countries; 1000 to 2000 deaths per year are linked to carbon 
   monoxide in the United States.
The frequency of non-lethal 
   intoxications by CO is probably much more significant, but 
   difficult to evaluate with precision because of the nonspecific 
   nature of the symptoms and clinical signs of the intoxication. It 
   is thus estimated that each year in the United States, more than 
   42 000 visits to emergency departments are due to intoxications by 
   CO with an annual rate of visits to the emergency for this of 16,5 
   by 100 000 inhabitants
Given the universal use of fossil energy 
   sources in our modern society, all of the individuals are 
   potentially at risk of being exposed. The intoxication risk seems 
   higher in countries of northern latitude with a higher frequency 
   during the winter months, but many cases of intoxication to CO 
   occur each year in all of the industrialized countries
Sources of exposure 
   :
Carbon monoxide can be released in many 
   industrial, environmental and domestic situations.
The main source of exposure to carbon 
   monoxide, without any doubt, is caused by its presence in the 
   exhaust fumes of internal combustion engines and in emission gases 
   during the incomplete combustion of combustible materials.
Exposures to CO in confined places are 
   responsible for the very large majority of the potentially 
   dangerous exposures. The inappropriate use of heating systems also 
   represents one of the principal causes of exposure to carbon 
   monoxide.
A-Uses and mission sources in the 
   workplace :
- the metallurgy of iron and various 
   other metals, their refining by their carbonyls (ex.:nickel 
   carbonyl), works by cutting and flamecutting;
- chemical syntheses: the manufacture of 
   calcium carbide and metal carbonyls;
- the use of explosives in mines and on 
   hydroelectric building sites;
- in garbage incineration, cement 
   factories;
- the use of lifting trucks
- the use of heating appliances 
   operating on coal, gas or other hydrocarbons (stove, furnace, 
   defective gas appliances);
- the endogenous metabolism of certain 
   xenobiotics can also lead to the production of CO as a metabolite: 
   methylene chloride, dibromomethane, diiodomethane and 
   bromochloromethane.
B-Main uses :
- as a fuel;
- as a reducing agent in metallurgy;
- in the chemical industry for the 
   synthesis of many compounds: methanol, acetic acid, formic acid, 
   acrylic acid, phosgene, etc.
C-Sources and concentrations of 
   carbon monoxide in the environment :
Carbon monoxide is present in the 
   troposphere as traces which find their origin in natural processes 
   and certain human activities. Given that plants are able to 
   metabolize carbon monoxide and to produce some, it is considered 
   that as traces, this gas is a normal constituent of the natural 
   environment.
The carbon monoxide concentration in the 
   air near urban agglomerations and industrial parks can be 
   appreciably higher than the normal natural concentration, but we 
   have yet to see a report of harmful effects on plants or
micro-organisms
which would be attributable to the concentrations 
   measured in these conditions.
It does remain that the presence of 
   carbon monoxide at these concentrations can be detrimental to 
   human health, according to the values reached in workplaces or in 
   residential zones, and in accordiance with the receptivity of the 
   subjects exposed to the potential harmful effects.
Upon examining air quality data provided 
   by fixed control stations, one notes a tendency to the decline of 
   the concentration of carbon monoxide which translates the 
   effectiveness of antipollution systems with which recent vehicles 
   are equipped. In the United States, the emissions due to motor 
   vehicles which run on highways represent approximately 50 % of the 
   total amount of carbon monoxide emitted, while 13% is due to 
   vehicles not running on highways. Among the other sources of 
   emission one can quote the use of other fuels than automobile 
   fuels, for example in boilers (12 %), various industrial processes 
   (8 %), solid waste disposal (3 %) and various other sources (14 
   %).
The concentrations to which the general 
   population is exposed for more or less long periods frequently 
   range from 29 to 57 mg of carbon monoxide per m3 (25-50 ppm); 
   under these circumstances, physical activity is generally reduced 
   and the resulting rate of carboxyhemoglobin does not exceed 1-2 % 
   among nonsmokers.
Inside buildings, the carbon monoxide 
   concentration depends on the concentration of the surrounding air, 
   on the presence of internal sources, the ventilation and air 
   mixing in each room, and from one room to the next. In dwellings 
   where there are no other sources, the carbon monoxide 
   concentration in the air is about the same as the average external 
   concentration. The highest concentrations occur in the presence of 
   interior sources of combustion, in particular in closed garages, 
   service stations and restaurants, for instance.
It is in the air of the dwelling houses, 
   churches and health care establishments that the carbon monoxide 
   concentration is the lowest. Lastly, cigarette smoking represents 
   a significant source of exposure to CO in the general population. 
   The amount of absobed CO following the use of cigarette depends on 
   certain factors, such as for example the frequency and the 
   intensity of inhalations.
The CO concentration is about 4,5 % (45 
   000 ppm) in cigarette smoke and will result among smokers in a 
   carboxyhaemoglobine varying from 3 to 8 %, although levels of up 
   to 15 % have already been reported.
It has been shown that passive 
   nicotinism resulting from the exposure to cigarette smoke on 
   average increases the exposure of non-smokers to approximately 1,7 
   mg/m3 (1,5 ppm) and that the use of a gas stove increases the CO 
   content of the air to approximately 2,9 mg/m3 (2,5 ppm). Among 
   other sources of carbon monoxide in the intenal air of dwellings 
   one can mention chimneys, water-heaters as well as coal or wood 
   stoves.
Toxicological properties 
   :
A-Toxicokinetics :
1-Absorption :
Carbon monoxide is absorbed exclusively 
   by the respiratory tract. It diffuses through the 
   alveolo-capillary membrane in way similar to oxygen. In the 
   presence of a constant concentration during several hours, the 
   rate of absorbtion decreases regularly until the partial pressures 
   of carbon monoxide in the blood of the pulmonary capillaries and 
   the alveolar air reach a state of equilibrium.
2-Distribution :
Most of the absorbed carbon monoxide 
   sets in a reversible way on the heme pigments of the body. At 
   least 80% bind to hemoglobin of the érythrocytes to form 
   carboxyhemoglobin. The affinity of hemoglobin for carbon monoxide 
   is approximately 240 to 250 times higher than that for oxygen.
10 to 15% reacts with the myoglobin of 
   the muscular cells. Myoglobin has a constant of affinity for 
   carbon monoxide approximately eight times weaker than that of 
   hemoglobin. The myocardial muscular cells retain more carbon 
   monoxide than the skeletal muscular cells (ratio 3:1).
5% can also react with other 
   heme-containing compounds (ex: cytochromes, metalloenzymes). 
   Carbon monoxide crosses the hematoencephalic and placental 
   barriers.
3-Métabolism :
Carbon monoxide is practically not 
   metabolized, less than 1% of the absorbed amount is oxidized to 
   carbon dioxide.
It is also produced in an endogenous way 
   by the body at the time of the catabolism of heme pigments.
The blood level of human endogenous 
   carboxyhemoglobin varies from 0,1 à 1,2%.
Principal
mechanism
of the toxic 
   action:
the link between carbon monoxide and 
   hemoglobin producing carboxyhemoglobin causes a decrease of the 
   capacity of oxygen blood transportation and interferes with the 
   release of oxygen at the tissular level..
4-Excretion :
Carbon monoxide is excreted almost 
   entirely in the expired air.
Elimination is done quickly at the 
   beginning, then becomes slower with time and when the 
   concentration of carboxyhemoglobin drops.
5-Half-life :
At rest, the elimination half-life of 
   blood carbon monoxide is approximately 3 to 4 hours for a subject 
   inhaling air and approximately 20 to 60 minutes for subjects 
   inhaling oxygen. With the administration of hyperbaric oxygen, the 
   elimination half-life of CO decreases but the numerical values 
   vary according to authors:
23 minutes at 3 atm.
27 minutes at 1.58 atm.
22 minutes at 2.5 atm.
It may increase with age and decrease 
   with physical activity.
The half-life of carbon monoxide in
foetal blood
is approximately 7 hours.
Immediately Dangerous to Life or 
   Health : 1200 ppm.
B- Physiopathology 
   :
Carbon monoxide intoxication causes 
   lesions mainly to cardiovascular and neurological systems and its 
   physiopathology is relatively complex.
1-Cellular hypoxia :
Carbon monoxide intoxication is 
   characterized initially by tissue hypoxia. It is a well-known fact 
   that carbon monoxide binds in a competitive way to hemoglobin to 
   form carboxyhemoglobin, an abnormal hemoglobin which cannot be 
   used to carry oxygen. The affinity of carbon monoxide for 
   hemoglobin is 240 to 250 times more significant than that of 
   oxygen and the ratio carboxyhemoglobin/oxyhemoglobin will be 
   proportional to the ratio of the partial pressures of carbon 
   monoxide and oxygen.
Carbon monoxide also involves a 
   displacement towards the left and a modification of the shape of 
   the intra-tissular dissociation curve of oxyhemoglobin, which 
   contributes even more to limit the release of oxygen at the 
   tissular level. Cellular hypoxia resulting from the formation of 
   carboxyhemoglobin will have as a harmful effect, a reflex increase 
   of ventilation, which will increase pulmonary absorbtion of carbon 
   monoxide in the context of a persistent exposure.
The link of carbon monoxide to 
   hemoglobin with secondary tissue hypoxia does not constitute 
   however the only physiopathological mechanism implied in CO 
   intoxication, and hypoxic stress cannot by itself explains the 
   development of neurological effects..
It does not seem to exist a direct 
   correlation between the degree of neurological effect and the 
   level of carboxyhemoglobin measured when the patient is admitted 
   at the emergency ward. Moreover, the transfusion to animals of 
   blood saturated with carboxyhemoglobin does not allow, in the 
   absence of free CO, to reproduce clinical symptomatology
2-Intracellular
toxicity
:
It seems that carbon monoxide can also 
   act as an intracellular toxin. It is estimated that about 15 % of 
   absorbed carbon monoxide will be bound to extravascular proteins. 
   Carbon monoxide binds to cardiac and musculoskeletal myoglobin 
   starting from levels of carboxyhemoglobin of the order of 2 %. and 
   could alter oxygen uptake to thus reduce the effectiveness of 
   oxydative phosphorylation at the myocardial level. Carbon monoxide 
   can also bind to cytochrome oxydase (cytochrome
a3
) which is the 
   final enzyme of the electron transport chain at the mitochondrial 
   level.
This link will have as a consequence a 
   deterioration in the ATP production and intracellular acidosis. 
   Persistent alteration of intracellular metabolism after cessation 
   of exposure could be explained by the bond of carbon monoxide to 
   cytochrome oxydase. A persistent inhibition of mitochondrial 
   cytochrome oxydase during several days was shown in human beings 
   following exposure to carbon monoxide producing levels of 
   carboxyhemoglobin varying from 11 to 22 %.
Exposure to carbon monoxide can lead to 
   the formation of reactive oxidizing molecules being able to induce 
   a lipidic peroxidation and a variety of lesions in the central 
   nervous system. Several physiopathological
mechanisms
encountered 
   during CO intoxication are similar to post-ischaemic lesions of 
   reperfusion. Among patients poisoned with CO, there is a positive 
   correlation which can be shown in an experimental way between 
   mitochondrial dysfonction induced by CO exposure and of lipidic 
   peroxidation.
Exposure to carbon monoxide causes a 
   nitric oxide release (NO) from blood platelets and endothelial 
   vascular cells with a significant increase of NO in perivascular 
   and vascular tissues. NO is a major physiological mediator and a 
   free radical of very short lifespan and has a cytotoxic potential. 
   The cytotoxic effect of NO can be partly associated with the 
   production of peroxynitrite, a major oxidant generated by the 
   reaction between NO and the superoxyde ion.
It seems that oxygenated free radicals 
   of the superoxyde type are produced in the context of a carbon 
   monoxide exposure by mitochondrial dysfonction induced by hypoxic 
   stress.
3-Neurological toxicity :
The produced peroxynitrite will be able 
   to bind to tissular proteins to produce the typical vascular and 
   perivascular neuro-histological lesions associated with CO 
   intoxication. The oxydative stress will thus have as a consequence 
   an increase in capillary
permeability
at the neurological level as 
   well as an increase in adhesion of the polymorphonuclear 
   leucocytes at the level of the altered endothelium. The adhesion 
   of the leucocytes to the cerebro-vascular endothelium will 
   contribute to a reduction in the cerebral perfusion and to the 
   initiation of the process of lipidic peroxidation.
It has been shown in experiments that 
   hyperbaric oxygen therapy can prevent the adhesion of leucocytes 
   to the endothelium in an animal model of exposure to carbon 
   monoxide. It thus seems probable that the neurological tissue 
   lesions associated with carbon monoxide intoxication are of 
   vascular origin. It seems also plausible that the cardiovascular 
   response to carbon monoxide intoxication is determining in the 
   importance of future neurological lesions.
4-Cardio-vascular toxicity 
   :
Carbon monoxide is associated with 
   myocardial depression explainable partly by hypoxic stress, by the 
   mitochondrial bond of CO with cytochrome
a3
, and by a link with 
   myocardial myoglobin. The link to myoglobin could play a major 
   role in myocardial depression associated with an intoxication by 
   CO given the significant role that myoglobin has on the 
   intracellular diffusion of oxygen.
The blocking of the function of 
   myoglobin is associated with a reduction in the uptake of oxygen 
   and a reduction in the production of ATP by the cardiac muscle. 
   Myocardial depression combined with peripheral vasodilatation 
   secondary to an increase in the concentrations of NO in the 
   vascular endothelium will have as a consequence arterial 
   hypotension with a reduction of the cerebral perfusion being able 
   to lead to a loss of consciousness and subsequently to ischaemic 
   lesions of reperfusion in the brain.
A transitory loss of consciousness is 
   generally regarded as a factor of bad prognosis in a carbon 
   monoxide intoxication. The possible cardiac toxic effects of CO 
   include:
- flutter,
- auricular fibrillation,
- ventricular tachycardia,
- ventricular fibrillation,
- myocardial ischemia.
It has been showed without ambiguity 
   that at the level of 5.0% carboxyhemoglobin, there was reduction 
   of oxygen binding and consecutive reduction in the physical 
   capacity under conditions of maximum exertion in young adults in 
   good health.
However, certain cardiovascular effects 
   are to feared more in the event of exposure to more characteristic 
   ambient carbon monoxide concentrations (in particular, the 
   aggravation of angina during physical activity) among a smaller 
   proportion but nevertheless considerable of the population. 
   Individuals suffering from chronic angina pectoris are currently 
   considered as the most receptive group to the effects of an 
   exposure to carbon monoxide, according to the signs of aggravation 
   of the angor noted among patients having a level of 
   carboxyhemoglobin from 2,9 to 4,5 %.
The lowest observed adverse effect level 
   (LOAEL) among patients suffering from exertional ischemia varies 
   between 3 and 4 % carboxyhemoglobin, i.e. a level higher than the 
   basic value by 1,5 to 2,2 %. One did not study the effects of 
   carbon monoxide on asymptomatic episodes of ischemia, which 
   represent in fact the majority of cases among these patients.
It was shown that a sufficient exposure 
   to produce a carboxyhemoglobin level of 6 % at least, appreciably 
   increased the number and the complexity of exertional arrhythmias 
   in the event of coronaropathy and ectopia. Exposure to carbon 
   monoxide can involve an increased risk of sudden death among 
   patients suffering from coronaropathy.
C-Acute clinical effects :
Carbon monoxide is a
chemical poisonous gas
.
The clinical manifestations of exposure 
   to carbon monoxide are multiple and nonspecific. The presence of 
   more than one affected person in the same physical place, of 
   nonspecific symptoms should make one suspect a CO intoxication. 
   Symptomatology may occur following an exposure to a low level over 
   a prolonged period of time or following a significant exposure 
   over a short period. In both cases, neurological after-effects may 
   occur. It thus seems that the severity of the intoxication to 
   carbon monoxide will depend on several factors:
- ambient carbon monoxide concentration,
- duration of exposure,
- individual susceptibility to CO 
   effects,
- general health status of the exposed 
   individual.
There is no reliable correlation between 
   the severity of the intoxication and the blood carboxyhemoglobin 
   (COHb) level measured at the time the patient is admitted in the 
   emergency department.
1- Acute general effects :
Symptoms of general order are frequent :
- headache,
- nausea,
- vomiting,
- generalized weakness.
Since CO intoxication frequently occurs 
   during winter, it is very frequent that the initial diagnosis is, 
   in an erroneous way, that of a viral infection. It was observed CO 
   exposure could be the unspecified cause of 5 to 19 % of the cases 
   of headaches in emergy departments.
2-Acute cardiovascular effects :
The clinical manifestations of 
   cardiovascular nature are also significant:
- thoracic pain,
- tachypnea,
- tachycardia,
- hypotension with syncope,
- convulsions,
- pulmonary oedema,
- cardiac arrhythmia and heart failure.
3-Acute neurological effects :
The possible neurological clinical 
   manifestations are multiple :
- ataxia,
- dizzy spells,
- disorders of memory,
- concentration reduction,
- convulsions,
- coma.
4-Other acute clinical effects :
The other significant clinical 
   manifestations are:
- metabolic acidosis,
- retinal hemorrhages.
Even if it does not constitute a 
   reliable marker of the severity of exposure, a significant rise in 
   COHb in a nonsmoker is useful for confirming the clinical 
   suspicion of an exposure.
5-Differential diagnosis :
Often times, clinical symptomatology 
   could be confused with certain current clinical conditions:
- infection of the higher respiratory 
   tract,
- food poisoning,
- cerebrovascular accident,
- psychiatric disorders,
- migraine,
- myocardial ischemia.
6-After-effects
A serious intoxication can leave cardiac 
   after-effects (modifications of the electrocardiogram) and 
   neurological ones (reduction in the intellectual capacity, 
   personality disorders and behavior).
7-Dose-effects relationship 
   :
Concentration (% 
            carboxyhemoglobin)
Probable effects following 
            acute exposure
3.5%
Biological exposure index.
10-20%
Light headache, dyspnea at the 
            time of intense muscular exertion, reduction of mental 
            acuity.
20-30%
Severe headache, dyspnea at the 
            time of moderated muscular exertion, nausea, 
            giddiness.
30-40%
Severe headache, nausea, 
            vomiting, muscular weakness, confusion, eye and judgement 
            troubles.
40-50%
Convulsions, loss of 
            consciousness.
50-70%
Coma, sometimes fatal cardiac 
            and respiratory depression.
plus de 66%
Death
Concentration
Probable effects following an 
            acute exposure (ppm CO) in a person in good 
            health
35 ppm
Valeur d'exposition moyenne 
            pondérée (VEMP)
200 ppm
Valeur d'exposition de courte 
            durée (VECD) Headache 2 to 3 hours after 
            exposure.
400 ppm
Headache and nausea 1 to 3 hours 
            after exposure
600-700 ppm
Headache and nausea 1 hour after 
            exposure
1 200 ppm
Immediately dangerous to life 
            or health (IDLH)
1 600 ppm
Headache, nausea, giddiness in 
            20 minutes, loss of consciousness, coma and death 2 hours 
            after exposure
3 200 ppm
Headache, giddiness in 5 
            minutes, coma and risk of death in 30 minutes
6 400 ppm
Headache, giddinesss in 1 to 2 
            minutes, coma and risk of death in15 minutes
20 000 ppm
Coma and death in 4 
            minutes
Effects of the increase in 
   carboxyhemoglobin (COHb) in the severely impaired cardiac patient 
   :
Concentration (% 
            carboxyhemoglobin)
Normal individual
Individual suffering from a 
            severe cardiac condition
< 1%
Engogenous production
-
1-5%
Increase of the arterial flow in 
            certain organs to compensate for the reduction in oxygen 
            (O2). transportion.
If the cardiac condition is 
            severe, the patient can decompensate.
5-9%
Lowering of the luminous visual 
            perception threshold.
Lowering of the required 
            exertion to cause angina.
16-20%
Headache, abnormal evoked visual 
            reaction.
Can cause death if the cardiac 
            function is very compromised.
8-Clinical evaluation :
Given the nonspecific nature of the 
   symptoms and signs of CO intoxication, it is of primary importance 
   for the clinician to maintain a high level of suspicion when 
   confronted by a clinical picture compatible with this poison, even 
   if a history of exposure is lacking.
The measurement of COHb remains of 
   very great utility to confirm the exposure: a level higher than 
   2-3 % in a nonsmoker or 10 % in a smoker should be considered 
   abnormal.
As mentioned previously, there is no 
   reliable correlation with the initial level of COHb and the future 
   evolution of the inoxication.
a-Clinical examination :
The following will have to be included 
   :
- examination of the higher mental 
   functions.
- certain specific psychometric tests 
   can be used, such as "CO Neuropsychological Screening Battery" 
   (CONSB).
Thus, the patient presenting, following 
   an exposure to CO, abnormal psychometric test results,
can be at risk to develop persistent or 
   delayed neurological abnormalities. Lastly, the usefulnessl of 
   psychometric tests to predict the need for a hyperbaric oxygen 
   therapy remains a discussed issue.
b-Paraclinical examinations 
   :
The following examinations could be 
   useful:
- arterial gases,
- electrocardiogram,
- cardiac enzymes,
- carboxyhemoglobin which must be 
   measured directly by a cooxymeter
using the wavelength adapted for this 
   abnormal hemoglobin.
9-Treatment
Following the confirmation of a CO 
   intoxication, it is important to identify as soon as possible the 
   exposure source in order to correct the problem and to prevent 
   later exposures among other individuals.
a-Normobaric oxygen therapy 
   :
The therapeutic method of choice for the 
   treatment of CO intoxication remains the delivery 100 % oxygen and 
   the suggested duration of treatment is 4 to 6 hours for the 
   majority of intoxications but certain sources suggest up to 48 
   hours of treatment.
b-Hyperbaric oxygen therapy 
   :
Since 1960, hyperbaric oxygen therapy is 
   used on a regular basis for the treatment of CO intoxication. In 
   theory, it comprises potential advantages for the treatment of CO 
   intoxication.These advantages include:
- faster elimination of CO
- improvement of tissue 
   oxygenation
- faster dissociation of CO on its site 
   of intracellular binding at the cytochrome oxydase level
- inhibition of leucocytic adhesion at 
   the vascular endothelium level
- prevention of the process of lipidic 
   peroxidation at the central nervous system level (possibility)
It is possible to obtain complete 
   recovery without after-effects following an intoxication to CO 
   without hyperbaric oxygen treatment and it is also possible to 
   find significant neurological anomalies after a hyperbaric oxygen 
   treatment.
The classical indications for hyperbaric 
   oxygen therapy are:
- coma or a history of loss of 
   consciousness,
- neuropsychological anomalies at 
   physical examination,
- cardiovascular instability,
- severe metabolic acidosis,
- carboxyhemoglobin greater than 40 %.
These indications are usually used in 
   clinical situations and represent a consensus among experts 
   without however having been validated in a rigorous scientific 
   way.
10-Irritation et corrosion 
   :
Carbon monoxide is not an irritating gas 
   for the respiratory tract and the eyes but contact with the liquid 
   gas can cause frostbites of the exposed tissues.
D-Chronic effects :
The presence of toxic effects associated 
   with a prolonged exposure to carbon monoxide is not yet clearly 
   elucidated in the consulted documentary sources.
Some authors report effects such 
   as:
- headache,
- asthenia,
- giddiness,
- insomnia,
- irritability,
- anorexia,
- subtle neuropsychological disorders 
   such as memory disturbances, etc.
Generally, there hardly exists data 
   indicating that atherogenic effects may occur in the population 
   due to exposure to carbon monoxide at the concentrations usually 
   met in ambient air
E-Sensitization 
   :
No data concerning respiratory and 
   cutaneous sensitizing was found in the consulted documentary 
   sources
F-Pregnancy :
1-Carbon monoxide intoxication and 
   pregnancy :
Carbon monoxide intoxication during 
   pregnancy poses particular problems. It seems that a significant 
   risk of foetal death and neurological anomalies exist following 
   exposure to CO for the mother, with a risk of foetal death varying 
   from 36 to 67 %. Ventilation being increased during pregnancy, it 
   is possible that CO pulmonary absorbtion is greater in the 
   pregnant woman. The affinity of foetal hemoglobin for CO is 
   greater than that of maternal hemoglobin.
An equilibrium state will be reached in 
   the foetus and the elimination of CO is slower for the foetal 
   circulation. The maximum level of carboxyhemoglobin reached during 
   the intoxication could be greater in the foetus than in the 
   mother.
On the basis of retrospective data, it 
   seems that oxygen therapy is safe for the foetus and the mother. 
   Precise information on hyperbaric is not established in a final 
   manner but a carboxyhemoglobin of 15 % is often used by several 
   experts as a critical value because of the greatest 
   physiopathological sensitivity of the foetal circulation.
2-Data on the mother's milk:
There is no data concerning its 
   excretion or detection in mother's milk.
G-Carcinogenic effects:
No data concerning a carcinogenic effect 
   was found in the consulted documentary sources.
Biological parameter, 
   biological exposure index and time of sampling:
A-Main exposure index 
   :
Carboxyhemoglobin: 3.5% ( end of break)
B-Other exposure index 
   :
Carbon monoxide in the expired 
   air:
ACGIH proposes a biological exposure 
   index of 20 ppm for a sample taken at the end of the workshift 
   This biological exposure index corresponds to a concentration 
   expected following an exposure to 25 ppm for
8 hours.
C-Factors to consider in the 
   interpretation :
- carboxyhemoglobin is not a specific 
   indicator of exposure to carbon monoxide;
- the biological exposure index does not 
   apply to smokers or to the people exposed to methylene 
   chloride;
- this biological index of exposure 
   corresponds to an exposure of 25 ppm. carbon monoxide.
D-Comments :
a-Biological values of 
   carboxyhemoglobin for a non- professionally exposed population 
   :
- Endogenous formation : less than 1%.
- Pregnant woman : 0,4 to 2,6 %.
- Patient suffering from hemolytic 
   anaemia : 4 to 6%.
- Urban population : 1 to 2%.
- Travellers on congested motorways : 5% 
   and more.
- Smokers : 1 package per day 5 to 6%, 2 
   to 3 packages per day 7 to 9%, cigar up to 20%.
- Exposure to 50 ppm of methylene 
   chloride during 8 hours: 1,5 to 2,5%.
b-Sensitive population :
Any individual who has an impaired 
   pulmonary function or a disease capable of affecting the blood 
   transportion capacity of oxygen or its availability :
- workers having respiratory diseases 
   (ex: emphysema, fibrosis).
- those who suffer from other diseases 
   (ex: a cardiopathy, arteriosclerosis, anemia).
- individuals having a particular 
   physiological state:
the pregnant woman,
the embryo or the foetus.
-individuals working under particular 
   conditions:
heavy work,
high temperature
high altitude (5 000 feet above the sea 
   level).
Hygiene and safety 
   :
A-Appearance :
At normal temperature and pressure, 
   carbon monoxide is a colourless and odourless gas.
B-Exposure characteristics :
The exposure to carbon monoxide in the 
   work environment, is done mainly by the gas. The exposure to 
   liquid gas generates an important carbon monoxide concentration 
   because of its very low boiling point and its high volatility. The 
   exposure to liquid gas is less frequent because of its less 
   widespread use.
C-Exposure to the gas 
   :
The absence of odor on the part of 
   carbon monoxide makes it so that it is impossible to identify its 
   presence before or after the VEMP (35 ppm or 40 mg/m³), or 
   the VECD (200 ppm or 230 mg/m³) are reached. The odor cannot 
   thus be an adequate sign of warning of a dangerous exposure. 
   Because of its density close to that of air, it mixes easily with 
   air and quickly can, in the event of leakage or of incomplete 
   organic matter combustion, reach dangerous concentrations.
The value of IDLH (Immediately Dangerous 
   to Life or Health, 1 200 ppm or 1 375 mg/m³) being 
   sufficiently low compared to the LLE (Lower Limit of Explosivity, 
   12, 5 % or 125 000 ppm), the risk of intoxication will occur well 
   before the risk of explosion.
Detectors are thus recommended where 
   exists the possibility of exposure to carbon monoxide
D-Exposure to the liquified gas :
Carbon monoxide in the liquid state, is 
   a cryogenic liquid at -191,5°C, it is thus necessary to hold 
   account of all the aspects which comprise the exposure to a liquid 
   at very low temperature.
E-Inflammability and explosiveness 
   :
1-Inflammability :
Carbon monoxide is a flammable gas; the 
   fire hazard is very high with strong concentrations and in the 
   presence of a source of ignition.
2-Explosiveness :
Carbon monoxide may form explosive 
   mixtures with air.
F-Combustion products 
   :
Carbon dioxide.
G-Reactivity :
1-Stability :
Stable at normal pressure and 
   temperature, carbon monoxide becomes reactive at high temperature 
   and can act as a powerful reducing agent.
2-Incompatibility :
Carbon monoxide is a strong reducing 
   agent which violently reacts with strong oxidants such as 
   halogens. It is incompatible with oxygen
3-Decomposition products :
It does not
decompose
under normal 
   conditions
Prevention :
Information campaigns should be 
   undertaken in a periodic way at the beginning of winter to inform 
   the public on the dangers of the potential sources of CO.
Several simple means to prevent CO 
   intoxications can be easily applied:
- the routine inspection and maintenance 
   of combustion devices and chimneys;
- the banning of letting car engines run 
   in closed garages at idle even when the door is open;
- the banning of the use of 
   non-ventilated cooking devices inside dwellings;
- the generalized use of CO detectors
Many CO intoxications can be explained 
   by the public's ignorance about its harmful effects
Protection measures :
Laws on Occupational health and Safety 
   aim at the elimination of hazaerds at the source. When engineering 
   measures and modifications of the working methods are not 
   sufficient enough to reduce the exposure to this substance, the 
   wearing of individual protection equipment may prove to be 
   necessary. The protection gears must be in conformity with 
   regulation
A-Respiratory tract :
Wear a suitable apparatus of respiratory 
   protection if the concentration in the work environment is greater 
   than the VEMP (35 ppm or 40 mg/m³) or than the VECD (200 ppm 
   or 230 mg/m³).
B-Skin :
Wear a suitable device of skin 
   protection if there is a hazard of splashes with the liquid gas. 
   The selection of protection equipement for the skin depends on the 
   nature of the work to carry out.
C-Eyes :
Wear a suitable protection device for 
   the eyes if there is a hazard of splashes with liquid gas. The 
   selection of an ocular protection gear depends on the nature of 
   work to carry out and, if it is necessary, on the type of device 
   of respiratory protection used.
Exposure standards 
   :
A-Workplace :
1-Quebec's exposure limits 
   :
a-Valeur d'exposition moyenne 
   pondérée (VEMP)
35 ppm 40 mg/m³
b-Valeur d'exposition de courte 
   durée (VECD)
200 ppm 230 mg/m³
B-Environment :
1-WHO :
-25 ppm/1 h
-9 ppm/8 h
2-EPA United Kingdom :
10 ppm/8 h
3-EPA USA :
35 ppm/1 h
9 ppm/8h
4-Japan :
-20 ppm/2 h
-10 ppm/8 h
5-Finland :
-25 ppm/1 h
-9 ppm/8 h
C-Dwellings air quality 
   :
Health Canada :
- < 11 ppm for 8 heures,
- < 25 ppm for 1 heure.
First Aid 
   :
A-Inhalation :
In the event of inhalation of the gas, 
   bring the person into a ventilated place. If she/he does not 
   breathe any- more, artificial respiration should be given. Give 
   oxygen, maintain the victim warm and tranfer she/he to the nearest 
   medical emergency department.
B-Frostbite :
In the case of frostbite, apply lukewarm 
   water and see a physician.
References :
1-CSST-Québec, 
   Répertoire Toxicologique, 2003
2-Toxicologie Industrielle et 
   Intoxications Professionnelles, Lauwerys R. dernière 
   édition.
3-Bulletin d'Information 
   Toxicologique du Québec, Vol 17, No.3.
4-IPCS No.213, Carbon Monoxide (2nd 
   edition), OMS, 1999.
5-Règlement sur la 
   qualité et la sécurité du travail, 
   Gouvernement du Québec, 2001.
By Edouard Bastarache
Related Information
Links
Typecodes
Article by Edouard Bastarache
Edouard Bastarache is a well known doctor that has written many articles on the subject of
toxicity
of ceramic materials and books on technical aspects of
ceramics
. He writes in both English and French.
Oxides
CO - Carbon Monoxide
Hazards
Fumes from gas kilns
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy