Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Hazards
Alumina Toxicology
|
Ammonia and Latex Toxicity
|
Antimony Oxide
|
Are colored porcelains hazardous?
|
Arsenic Oxide
|
Asbestos Toxicity
|
Ball Clay
|
BARIUM and COMPOUNDS Toxicology
|
Barium Carbonate in Clay Bodies
|
Barium Carbonate in Glazes
|
Bentonite Toxicity
|
Beryllium Monoxide Toxicology
|
Bismuth Trioxide Toxicology
|
Boron Compounds and Their Toxicity
|
Brown Stain
|
Cadmium Toxicity
|
Calcium Carbonate Toxicology
|
Carbon Monoxide Toxicity
|
Cesium Toxicology
|
Chromium Compounds Toxicology
|
Clay Toxicity
|
Cobalt Oxide and Carbonate
|
Cobalt Toxicology
|
Copper Compounds Toxicology
|
Copper Oxide and Carbonate
|
Cristobalite Toxicity
|
Cryolite and Ceramics
|
Dealing With Dust in Ceramics
|
Diatomaceous Earth Toxicology
|
Dioxins in Clays
|
Epsom Salts
|
Eye Injuries Due to Radiation
|
Feldspar
|
Fighting Micro-Organisms in Ceramics
|
Fluorine Gas
|
Fumes from gas kilns
|
Gallium Oxide Toxicology
|
Hafnium Oxide Toxicty
|
Hydrofluoric Acid Toxicity
|
Iron oxide and Hematite
|
Lead Chromate
|
Lead in Ceramic Glazes
|
Lead Toxicology
|
Lithium Carbonate Toxicity
|
Lithium Toxicology
|
Man-Made Vitreous Fibers (MMVF) Toxicology
|
Man-Made Vitreous Fibers Safety Update
|
Manganese and Parkinsons by Jane Watkins
|
Manganese in Clay Bodies
|
Manganese Inorganic Compounds Toxicology
|
Manganese Toxicity by Elke Blodgett
|
Manganese: Creativity and Illness by Dierdre O'Reilly
|
Molybdenum Compounds Toxicology
|
Nickel Compounds Toxicity
|
Niobium Oxide Toxicity
|
Occupational Dermatoses
|
Overview of Material Safety by Gavin Stairs
|
Paraffin Toxicology
|
Perlite Toxicity
|
Plant Ash Toxicity
|
Potassium Carbonate Toxicity
|
Pregnancy and Ceramics
|
Propane Toxicology
|
Quartz Toxicity
|
Quartz Toxicity on Clayart
|
Rare Earth Compounds Toxicity
|
Rubidium and Cesium Toxicology
|
Rutile Toxicology
|
Silicosis and Screening
|
Silver Compounds Toxicology
|
Sodium Azide Toxicology
|
Sodium Carbonate Toxicology
|
Sodium Silicate Powder Toxicology
|
Stannous Chloride Toxicity
|
Strontium Carbonate Toxicity Note
|
Sulfur Dioxide Toxicity
|
Talc Hazards Overview
|
Talc Toxicology
|
Thallium Oxide Toxicology
|
Thorium Dioxide Toxicity
|
Tin Inorganic Compounds
|
Titanium Dioxide Toxicology
|
Toxicological Assessment of Zeolites
|
Tungsten Compounds Toxicology
|
Understanding Acronyms on MSDS's
|
Uranium and Ceramics
|
Vanadium and Compounds Toxicology
|
Vermiculite
|
Zinc Compounds Toxicology
|
Zirconium Compounds Toxicity
|
Zirconium Encapsulated Stains Toxicity
Silicosis and Screening
1-Introduction :
Pneumoconioses :
Parenchymal lung diseases due to chronic inhalation of inorganic (mineral) dusts are called pneumoconioses. Certain inorganic dusts, such as those containing
silica
, coal, asbestos, or beryllium, are
fibrogenic. Rarely, hard metals and aluminum dust are associated with diffuse pulmonary fibrosis; clinical, x-ray, and physiologic changes resemble those in other diseases caused by dust inhalation and characterized by diffuse pulmonary fibrosis.
Several inert dusts, including
iron oxide
, barium, and tin, are non fibrogenic and can produce conditions known as siderosis, baritosis, and stannosis, respectively. The abnormal x-rays in these conditions
reflect the radio dense appearance of the deposited materials and do not indicate disease because there are no symptoms or
functional
impairment.
Silicosis :
Silicosis is a pneumoconiosis usually caused by inhaling
crystalline
free silica (silicon dioxide, quartz) dust and characterized by discrete nodular pulmonary fibrosis and, in more advanced stages, by
conglomerate fibrosis and respiratory impairment.
Silicosis
, one of the oldest occupational diseases, still kills thousands of people every year, everywhere in the world. It is an incurable lung disease caused by inhalation of dust containing free
crystalline silica
. It is irreversible and, moreover, the disease progresses even when exposure stops.
Usually, exposure of 20 to 30 years is necessary before the disease becomes apparent, altough it develops in less than 10 years when the exposure to dust is extremely high.
2-Etiology :
Silica, the causative agent :
Free crystalline silica,
SiO
2
, is one of the most common minerals in the earth's crust. It is found in sand, many rocks such as granite, sandstone, flint and slate, and in some coal and metallic ores. The
three most common forms are quartz, tridymite and
cristobalite
.
Crystalline silica :
As a general rule, the smaller the diameter of particles, the more efficient is the pulmonary clearance by the bronchi and acini.
The bronchial and alveolar retention of particles is the result of two opposing factors, deposition and clearance. Retention of dust will be at its peak, depending on the nature of dust, for the particles
whose diameter ranges from 0.5 to 3 microns.
Quartz particles in the occupational setting range widely in size, but those less than 1 micron are believed to be the most pathogenic.
Since large particles impact and sediment in the nares and the major airways, only relatively small particles enter the acini.
The size of silica particles retained in the human lung is remarkably constant, with median diameters ranging from 0.5 to 0.7 micron.
The crystalline silica, alpha quartz, is the major cause of silicosis worldwide.
Although the silica polymorphs, cristobalite and tridymite, prove more toxic for cells and are highly fibrogenic under experimental conditions, these two mineralogic variants are of more limited health
variance.
Respirable silica dust may be invisible to the naked eye and is so light that it can remain airborne for a long time. It can thus travel long distances in the air and so affect populations not otherwise
considered to be at risk.
Sources :
Silica dust is released during operations in which rocks, sand, concrete and some ores are crushed or broken.
Work in mines, quarries, foundries, and construction sites, in the manufacture of glass,ceramics, and abrasive powders, and in masonry workshops is particularly risky.
The production and use of
refractory
brick containing silica may pose significant health hazards particularly after they have been exposed to high temperatures as a significant proportion of the silica is
transformed to cristobalite or tridymite.
Bricklayers and others who maintain and dismantle the refractory brick of ovens, furnaces and other similar devices are exposed to a serious silica hazard.
Extremely high exposures, eg, in industries such as tunneling, abrasive soap making, and sand blasting, are associated with much shorter latency and more rapid disease progression.
Any abrasive blasting, even if the abrasive does not contain silica, may pose a silicosis hazard when it is used to remove materials that contain silica, such as remains of sand moulds from metal
castings.
Some operations, like dry sweeping, the clearing of sand or concrete, or the cleaning of masonry with pressurized air can generate large dust clouds. Thus even in open air these activities can be
hazardous.
3-Miscellaneous Epidemiologic Data 
:
In certain places 
in the world, an age-old scenario is being repeated. In the 16th 
century Agricola wrote of mines in the Carpathian mountains in 
Europe: " women are found to have married seven husbands, all of 
whom this terrible consumption (silico-tuberculosis) has carried 
off to a premature death ".
Only a few years 
ago certain villages in Northern Thailand were called " villages 
of widows " because of the large number of 
pestle-and-mortar-making workers who died early from 
silicosis.
1-During the 
period 1991 to 1995, China recorded more than 500 000 cases of 
silicosis,with around 6 000 new cases and more than 24 000 deaths 
occurring each year mostly among older workers.
2-In the USA, it 
is estimated that more than one million workers are occupationally 
exposed to free crystalline silica dusts (more than 100 000 of 
these workers are sandblasters), of whom some 59 000 will 
eventually develop silicosis. It is reported that each year in the 
USA about 300 people die from it, but the true number is not 
known.
3-Abrasive 
blasting with
silica sand
, often used to prepare surfaces for 
painting, has been associated with exposures 200 times greater 
than the level recommended by theUS National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health. This agency recommended that 
silica sand be prohibited as an abrasive blasting agent.
4-In Quebec, 
Canada, in the years 1988-1994, 40 newly diagnosed workers were 
compensated (12 were less than 40 years old).
4-Pathology and Pathophysiology :
Alveolar 
macrophages engulf respirable particles of free silica and enter 
the lymphatics and interstitial tissue. The macrophages cause 
cytotoxic enzymes to be released, and fibrosis of the lung 
parenchyma occurs. When a macrophage dies, the silica particles 
are released and engulfed by other macrophages, and the process 
may be repeated.
The typical 
initial pathologic change is the formation of discrete hyalinized 
silicotic nodules throughout the lungs. The dying macrophages 
release silica in the interstitial tissue around the second 
division of the respiratory bronchiole, where it forms a nodule. 
Later, coalescence of fibrosis results in conglomerate masses, 
contraction of the upper lung zones, and emphysema with marked 
distortion of lung architecture. Ventilatory and gas exchange 
functions are affected adversely. A reduction of all lung volumes 
distinguishes the overall physiologic pattern of conglomerate 
silicosis from that of advanced pulmonary emphysema. Severe 
functional impairment occurs in the late stages of conglomerate 
silicosis, and respiratory insufficiency - its ultimate 
consequence may progress along with radiographic worsening for a 
limited time (ie, 2 to 5 yr) even after exposure ceases. When the 
exposure to dust is extremely high and acute silicoproteinosis 
develops, the alveolar spaces fill with a proteinaceous material 
similar to that found in alveolar proteinosis, and mononuclear 
cells infiltrate the septa.
5-Symptoms and Signs :
The form and 
severity in which silicosis manifests itself depend on the type 
and extent of exposure to silica dusts.
Patients with
simple 
nodular silicosis
have no respiratory symptoms and usually no 
respiratory impairment. They may cough and raise sputum, but these 
symptoms are due to industrial bronchitis and occur as often in 
persons with normal x-rays. Although simple silicosis has little 
effect on pulmonary function, patients with category 2 or 3 
disease occasionally have slightly reduced lung volumes, but the 
values are seldom outside the predicted range.
Conglomerate 
silicosis
, 
in contrast, may lead to severe shortness of breath, cough,and 
sputum. The severity of the shortness of breath is related to the 
size of the conglomerate masses in the lungs. When the masses are 
extensive, the patient becomes severely disabled. As the masses 
encroach on and obliterate the vascular bed, pulmonary 
hypertension and right ventricular hypertrophy supervene. In an 
advanced state, there may be physical findings of consolidation 
and of pulmonary hypertension.
Nonhypoxemic cor 
pulmonale eventually causes death.
In 
conglomerate (complicated) silicosis
, especially in the late 
stages, pulmonary function abnormalities are common. They include 
decreased lung volumes and diffusing capacity, and airway 
obstruction, frequently with pulmonary hypertension and, 
occasionally, mild hypoxemia.
CO2
retention is unusual. In many 
patients with silicosis, the serum contains lung autoantibodies 
and antinuclear factor. Persons who are occupationally exposed to 
silica and who have a positive tuberculin test are at greater risk 
of developing TB. Generally, the more silica in the lungs, the 
greater the risk.
A frequent cause 
of death in people with silicosis is pulmonary tuberculosis 
(silico-tuberculosis).
Respiratory 
insufficiencies due to massive fibrosis and emphysema (respiratory 
tissue loss is not always present), as well as heart failure, are 
other causes of death.
6-Diagnosis :
Diagnosis is 
based on characteristic chest x-ray changes and a history of 
exposure to free silica. Simple silicosis is recognized by the 
presence of multiple, small, rounded or regular opacities on the 
chest x-ray and is classified as category 1, 2, or 3 according to 
their profusion. Conglomerate silicosis is recognized by the 
development of an
opacity
> 1 cm in diameter on a background of 
category 2 or 3 simple silicosis. Numerous other diseases may 
resemble simple silicosis, including miliary TB, welders' 
siderosis, hemosiderosis, sarcoidosis, and coal workers' 
pneumoconiosis.
However, the 
presence of eggshell calcifications in the hilar and mediastinal 
lymph nodes distinguishes silicosis from other occupational lung 
diseases.
Silicotuberculosis
resembles conglomerate 
silicosis on x-rays. The distinction can be made by sputum 
culture.
7-Treatment :
No effective 
treatment is known other than lung transplantation. Persons with 
airway obstruction should be treated as for chronic airway 
obstruction. Those exposed to silica who have a positive 
tuberculin test but negative sputum TB cultures should be given 
isoniazid for at least 1 yr. Some authorities recommend lifelong 
treatment because the function of alveolar macrophages may be 
permanently compromised by silica. Lifelong isoniazid prophylaxis 
may be indicated for those who have been treated previously for 
active pulmonary TB. Patients with silicosis and active pulmonary 
TB require extension of standard multidrug therapy by at least 3 
to 6 mo.
8-Screening for silicosis :
Introduction 
:
Diagnosis and 
health surveillance are essential components of any programme 
aiming at eliminating silicosis. Although medical and radiological 
examinations can only detect and not prevent silicosis, these are 
important complements to primary prevention.
However, 
surveillance should be considered as a complement to control 
strategies and never as a replacement for primary 
prevention.
According to 
Quebec's guidelines, chest X-ray is the only tool recommended to 
screen for silicosis. Pulmonary lesions can be found on chest 
X-rays before the presence of symptoms.
It is an 
effective screening test depending on the importance of exposure 
(amount and duration).
Naturally films 
must be read by a B-reader, a radiologist with a special 
training.
Pulmonary 
function testing is useless when workers do not experience 
pulmonary symptoms.
Physical 
examination is also useless at the screening level.
The use of a 
standardized pulmonary questionnaire may be useful only to screen 
for chronic bronchitis, mainly related to tobacco smoking.
Medical 
surveillance :
High risk 
workers :
As in 
sandblasting where the exposure to respirable crystalline silica 
may be in the vicinity of, and even more than 2½ times the 
exposure limit, chest X-ray should be done every year until 
important corrective measures are put in place to lower the 
exposure to safer levels after prompt and vigorous intervention by 
the team responsible for occupational health and safety.
These high-risk 
levels should not be tolerated for being very hazardous.
When adequate 
protective gears are supplied, chest X-ray could be done less 
frequently for obvious reasons, one good exemple would be every 3 
years.
Cumulative 
dose :
If workers' level 
of exposure is in the vicinity of 0.1mg/m3, for 8 hours a day and 
40 hours a week, a first chest X-ray is suggested after the first 
10 years of exposure, then another one10 years later and finally, 
one every 5 years. This pattern of medical surveillance is 
determined using the "cumulative dose" concept which goes as 
follows :
level of 
exposure (mg/m3) x years of exposure = cumulative dose 
(mg/m3/year)
At the level of 
1mg/m3/year,
a first chest X-ray
should be performed. And, 
at 2mg/m3/year, another chest X-ray should be prescribed.
When the score is 
higher than 2.0 mg/m3/year, a chest X-ray should be done everytime 
the cumulative dose increases by 0.5 mg/m3/year.
Therefore, a 
worker exposed to very low levels, like 0.025 mg/m3, shall not 
have a chest X-ray before 40 years of exposure.
Mine and 
quarry workers are covered by a special by-law :
They must have a 
pulmonary examination every 3 years including a physical 
examination and a chest X-ray. The first examination for employees 
who have never been exposed to silica or asbestos should take 
place within the first 6 years after being hired.
A pre-employment 
examination is mandatory and also include a questionnaire of 
pulmonary symptoms and a lung physiology evaluation.
These guidelines 
have been suggested since 1996.
9-Exposure limits :
Quebec's 
exposure limits :
Substance
VEMP
Notes
Cristobalite
0.05 
mg/m3
Pr
Quartz
0.10 
mg/m3
Pr, C2, 
EM
Tridymite
0.05 
mg/m3
Pr
Tripoli
0.10 
mg/m3
Pr
Pr = Respirable 
dust.(Poussière respirable)
C2 = Suspected 
carcinogen to humans
EM = Substance 
that should be kept at the lowest practicable level
10-Prophylaxis :
Action should 
be taken
before exposure happens.Silicosis is prevented by avoiding 
inhalation of dust containing free crystalline silica. Alice 
Hamilton (1869-1970), pioneer occupational physician and hygienist 
who conducted major studies on silicosis in the USA said: " 
obviously the way to attack silicosis is to prevent the formation 
and escape of dust".
1-At the turn of 
the 20th century in Vermont, USA, introduction of pneumatic tools 
to the granite cutting industry was followed by a dramatic rise in 
death rate from silicosis.(Pneumatic tools generated much larger 
quantities of free crystalline silica-containing dust.) In the 
late 1930s, dust control measures were introduced and the number 
of new cases of disease gradually decreased, until there were 
virtually none by 1967.
2-In Switzerland, 
stricter controls in the 1970s and 1980s led to approximately 
six-fold reduction in the number of silicosis cases per year (many 
residual from previous exposure).
Because dust 
suppression cannot reduce the risk in sandblasting, 
external-air-supplied hoods should be used. Such protection may 
not be available to personnel performing other jobs in the area 
(eg, painting, welding). Thus substituting other abrasive 
materials for sand is desirable.
So, good 
housekeeping of your studio is very important; to do so you may, 
among other things, use wet processes, or even a vacuum system 
whose air is exhausted outside of the workshop.
Avoidance of 
processes generating unnecessary dust is also important. To this, 
we may add work in closed systems and improvement of the general 
ventilation.
The wearing of an 
approved dust mask for this kind of hazard is also recommended 
when the level of exposure seems problematic.
References 
:
1-Important 
aerosols in occupational settings, André Dufresne 
Ph.D.(McGill University), Montreal,Canada.
2-Toxicologie 
Industrielle et Intoxications Professionnelles, Robert R. 
Lauwerys, 1999.
3-Les Maladies 
Respiratoires d'Origine Professionnelle, Marinet Y., Anthoine D., 
Petiet G.,1999
4-Silicosis, 
the WHO, fact sheet # 238, May 2000.
5-The Merck 
Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy, on-line publication.
By Edouard Bastarache
Related Information
Links
Typecodes
Article by Edouard Bastarache
Edouard Bastarache is a well known doctor that has written many articles on the subject of
toxicity
of ceramic materials and books on technical aspects of
ceramics
. He writes in both English and French.
Materials
Silica
Silica
, sold as a white powder, is pure quartz mineral. Quartz is pure
SiO2
silicon dioxide. It is the most abundant mineral on earth and most used in
ceramics
.
Hazards
Plant Ash Toxicity
The hazards of using plant and wood ash in ceramic glazes
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy