Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Articles
A ChatBot gives jaw-dropping glaze recipe advice - Jan 2025
A Low Cost Tester of Glaze Melt Fluidity
A One-speed Lab or Studio Slurry Mixer
A Textbook Cone 6 Matte Glaze With Problems
Adjusting Glaze Expansion by Calculation to Solve Shivering
Alberta Slip, 20 Years of Substitution for Albany Slip
An Overview of Ceramic Stains
Are You in Control of Your Production Process?
Are Your Glazes Food Safe or are They Leachable?
Attack on Glass: Corrosion Attack Mechanisms
Ball Milling Glazes, Bodies, Engobes
Binders for Ceramic Bodies
Bringing Out the Big Guns in Craze Control: MgO (G1215U)
Can We Help You Fix a Specific Problem?
Ceramic Glazes Today
Ceramic Material Nomenclature
Ceramic Tile Clay Body Formulation
Changing Our View of Glazes
Chemistry vs. Matrix Blending to Create Glazes from Native Materials
Concentrate on One Good Glaze
Copper Red Glazes
Crazing and Bacteria: Is There a Hazard?
Crazing in Stoneware Glazes: Treating the Causes, Not the Symptoms
Creating a Non-Glaze Ceramic Slip or Engobe
Creating Your Own Budget Glaze
Crystal Glazes: Understanding the Process and Materials
Deflocculants: A Detailed Overview
Demonstrating Glaze Fit Issues to Students
Diagnosing a Casting Problem at a Sanitaryware Plant
Drying Ceramics Without Cracks
Duplicating Albany Slip
Duplicating AP Green Fireclay
Electric Hobby Kilns: What You Need to Know
Fighting the Glaze Dragon
Firing Clay Test Bars
Firing: What Happens to Ceramic Ware in a Firing Kiln
First You See It Then You Don't: Raku Glaze Stability
Fixing a glaze that does not stay in suspension
Formulating a body using clays native to your area
Formulating a Clear Glaze Compatible with Chrome-Tin Stains
Formulating a Porcelain
Formulating Ash and Native-Material Glazes
G1214M Cone 5-7 20x5 glossy transparent glaze
G1214W Cone 6 transparent glaze
G1214Z Cone 6 matte glaze
G1916M Cone 06-04 transparent glaze
Getting the Glaze Color You Want: Working With Stains
Glaze and Body Pigments and Stains in the Ceramic Tile Industry
Glaze Chemistry Basics - Formula, Analysis, Mole%, Unity
Glaze chemistry using a frit of approximate analysis
Glaze Recipes: Formulate and Make Your Own Instead
Glaze Types, Formulation and Application in the Tile Industry
Having Your Glaze Tested for Toxic Metal Release
High Gloss Glazes
Hire Us for a 3D Printing Project
How a Material Chemical Analysis is Done
How desktop INSIGHT Deals With Unity, LOI and Formula Weight
How to Find and Test Your Own Native Clays
I have always done it this way!
Inkjet Decoration of Ceramic Tiles
Is Your Fired Ware Safe?
Leaching Cone 6 Glaze Case Study
Limit Formulas and Target Formulas
Low Budget Testing of Ceramic Glazes
Make Your Own Ball Mill Stand
Making Glaze Testing Cones
Monoporosa or Single Fired Wall Tiles
Organic Matter in Clays: Detailed Overview
Outdoor Weather Resistant Ceramics
Painting Glazes Rather Than Dipping or Spraying
Particle Size Distribution of Ceramic Powders
Porcelain Tile, Vitrified Tile
Rationalizing Conflicting Opinions About Plasticity
Ravenscrag Slip is Born
Recylcing Scrap Clay
Reducing the Firing Temperature of a Glaze From Cone 10 to 6
Setting up a Clay Testing Program in Your Company or Studio
Simple Physical Testing of Clays
Single Fire Glazing
Soluble Salts in Minerals: Detailed Overview
Some Keys to Dealing With Firing Cracks
Stoneware Casting Body Recipes
Substituting Cornwall Stone
Super-Refined Terra Sigillata
The Chemistry, Physics and Manufacturing of Glaze Frits
The Effect of Glaze Fit on Fired Ware Strength
The Four Levels on Which to View Ceramic Glazes
The Majolica Earthenware Process
The Potter's Prayer
The Right Chemistry for a Cone 6 Magnesia Matte
The Trials of Being the Only Technical Person in the Club
The Whining Stops Here: A Realistic Look at Clay Bodies
Those Unlabelled Bags and Buckets
Tiles and Mosaics for Potters
Toxicity of Firebricks Used in Ovens
Trafficking in Glaze Recipes
Understanding Ceramic Materials
Understanding Ceramic Oxides
Understanding Glaze Slurry Properties
Understanding the Deflocculation Process in Slip Casting
Understanding the Terra Cotta Slip Casting Recipes In North America
Understanding Thermal Expansion in Ceramic Glazes
Unwanted Crystallization in a Cone 6 Glaze
Using Dextrin, Glycerine and CMC Gum together
Volcanic Ash
What Determines a Glaze's Firing Temperature?
What is a Mole, Checking Out the Mole
What is the Glaze Dragon?
Where do I start in understanding glazes?
Why Textbook Glazes Are So Difficult
Working with children
Reducing the Firing Temperature of a Glaze From Cone 10 to 6
Description
Moving a cone 10 high temperature glaze down to cone 5-6 can require major surgery on the recipe or the transplantation of the color and surface mechanisms into a similar cone 6 base glaze.
Article
It is amazing how many potters or small scale manufacturers will push their
clay bodies
or kilns (and utility bills) to the temperature limit to get a special
reactive glaze
to melt the way they want. No industrial manufacturer could afford or would have the desire to do this, it only makes sense to fire to the lowest possible temperature and as fast as possible (typical industrial firings last as little as one hour these days). It takes much more energy, for example, in a typical poorly insulated kiln (any inexpensive kiln is poorly insulated) to increase the temperature by 1 degree at 1000C than it does to do the same at 500C. Obviously, lower temperatures also mean less wear and tear on kilns, especially electric. Not so obviously, it can be easier to keep the temperature even throughout the kiln at lower temperatures and thus either easier to soak at the end or shut it off in (with an even-temperature condition throughout the kiln chamber at shut-off time). In addition, at lower temperatures kilns have an easier time holding to a programmed schedule (and thus maintaining consistency firing-after-firing is easier).
At the same time it does not make sense to fire too low either since quality and strength issues come into play below about
cone 1
using traditional bodies and glazes. It is important to realize that high temperature firing is not a requirement for strength and quality ware. Also, the range of achievable colors and color consistency is better at lower temperatures. Lower fired bodies can also be very dense and strong. Dental
porcelain
, albeit an extreme example, completely melts into a white pool of glass far lower than any typical
functional
porcelain would even begin to densify. Admittedly the mullite-glass-silica microstructure characteristic of high temperature porcelains is not as highly developed in middle-fire bodies, but other strength-imparting
crystalline
matrixes can be employed. But even with the simple glass-bonding-of-aggregates
mechanism
you need make no apologies for cone 4-6 porcelain strength (when I say 'cone 6' below I mean cone 4-6, or, middle temperatures).
The question is: Can you juggle the amounts (e.g. increase the fluxes) of ingredients in a typical cone 10 glaze recipe to make it melt at
cone 6
? The answer is almost always no. Middle and high fire glazes employ different fluxing
oxides
and they interact differently. To understand, let's fire lower for a moment.
Low fire
glazes (cone 06-02) are fundamentally different in a one principal way, they contain lots of
boron
, it is the key and principle
flux
. Cone 10 glazes contain none. Additionally, oxides that behave as fluxes at cone 10, like
MgO
and
CaO
, act as
refractory
matting agents at low fire! Cone 5-6 is a bit of an in-between land in this sense. Some boron is almost always needed because common cone 10 fluxes like
feldspars
,
calcium carbonate
,
talc
and
dolomite
do not melt well at all at
cone 5
. Thus, increasing the content of existing cone 10 fluxes to melt at cone 6 will not work, you must introduce new more powerful (better melting) ones and learn a new set of dynamics, interactions and tradeoffs. There are some special purpose
middle-temperature
glazes that will melt without boron (e.g. high zinc fast fire or bristol glazes) but these often require special expertise and lots of tolerance, I will not discuss them.
Cone 10 raw glazes contrast from those made only with
frits
. They contain a number of individual materials, most of which in turn contain a number of different components (or minerals). Thus, microscopically, raw glaze powders are mixtures of particles having very different 'individual' melt behaviors up to, and at the target temperature of the firing. Some have already, or are about to melt suddenly and flow while other more stable ones are caught somewhere along a softening process that spans range of temperatures. Some change crystal form. Some do nothing. However, their behavior together, in the 'orchestra' of firing, involves interactions that produce the 'music' of these glazes. The active ones get a melt started, that melt takes others into solution and changes
chemistry
and behavior with temperature rise. Each different particle type finds itself engulfed in an expanding melt and influences that melt differently. Does it sound like this should be easy to calculate? The inventory of these is quite interesting (we won't look at
colorants
,
opacifiers
,
variegators
):
Pure mineral flux particles like dolomite, whiting and talc are active melters at cone 10 but certainly not at cone 6. You could increase them all you like, you'll never get a workable cone 6 glaze. By 'workable' I mean that although you might be able to get it to melt, so much of the recipe would be taken up by these materials that a stable
low expansion
glaze could not be created for the lack of alumina and
silica
.
Kaolin and ball clays are refractory (melt high) and (they have to be dissolved by other things). To reduce a glaze's melting range the percentage of these materials obviously must be reduced when reducing the temperature. However their amounts can only be taken down to about 15% or the glaze
slurry
won't suspend or dry hard (unless you employ organic binders that introduce side effects not easily dealt with by potters or small operations). More important, clays are the key alumina supplier, taking them too low will detrimentally affect glaze hardness and melt
viscosity
and increase
thermal expansion
.
Silica is the key glass building oxide in any glaze, most glazes need at least some raw quartz powder in the recipe. But quartz is no where close to melting at
stoneware
temperatures, it has to be dissolved by other materials that create a
fluid melt
. Attempting to employ high temperature fluxes at cone 6 is not going to dissolve any badly needed silica into a melt.
Feldspars (and
Nepheline Syenite
) have complex chemistries and soften over a range of temperatures, they begin to melt at cone 6. However they don't melt well. If you add enough high-thermal-expansion
feldspar
to a high fire glaze to melt it at cone 6 you will have a guaranteed
crazing
glaze as well as one that is likely to leach because sodium and potassium will be oversupplied.
The bottom line is that we cannot just reorganize a cone 10 recipe to melt at cone 6. We must add something new, a flux or fluxes not normally found in cone 10 glazes. We must also reduce the proportion of silica and alumina in the glaze, since even with added fluxes it is not possible to get a glaze to dissolve the amounts of high melting alumina and silica typically found in cone 10 glazes. I am not saying it is impossible, you might be the magician who has found a way. But remember, the challenge here is to adjust an existing cone 10 recipe to melt at cone 5- 6 and not
craze
or leach or scratch easily and still have good application and working properties. That is not easy.
The most obvious solution is to add powerful fluxes like
zinc oxide
or
lithium carbonate
(not commonly used, or needed, at cone 10). They melt very early and vigorously and can impart significant melting effects in small amounts in some circumstances. The only problem is that this is not one of those circumstances. A little zinc is not going to dissolve a lot of refractory particles. Zinc and lithium are like people "with personality issues", they participate at a cost if over employed. A lot of zinc and/or lithium to make the glaze melt at cone 5-6 will create a whole new animal and a whole new set of problems (especially with regard to color response, surface character, tendency to
devitrify
(crystallize),
crawl
, bubble, etc.)
I want to point out that when I say we need to 'add something new', I did not mean a material. I meant an oxide. Materials are composed of oxides, and most materials contribute more than one oxide (sometimes 6 or 8 different ones, e.g. feldspars). When you talk about a fired glaze and the way it melts and solidifies, you are talking mainly about chemistry (oxides), whether you like it or not. If we add or remove feldspar, for example, we are making a fundamental change in the balance of oxides in the glaze (because it contributes so many oxides), that does not jibe with the objective of making changes that will give the greatest reduction in melting behavior accompanied by the least change in overall glaze appearance and fired properties (e.g. color response, thermal expansion, surface character, working properties).
There are two main approaches we can take.
Method 1: Transplant Mechanisms
At the risk of negating most of what I have just said, identify the "
mechanisms
" in the glaze and transplant them into a good
base glaze
for cone 6 that has similar surface texture and degree of melting (compare with a flow tester if needed). Answer these questions:
What gives it the color? Is it a stain, a metal oxide, a stained clay or mineral, or the growth of micro-crystals (surface or entrained) that have a characteristic color? Put this 'mechanism' into a cone 6 base. Note however that you need to think about whether a color depends on a sympathetic chemistry in the base glaze. When employed in slow firing, some
stains
for example, require that the base glaze be zinc or magnesia free. Others require the presence of a certain amount of CaO.
Crystallization
effects from raw metal oxide powders likewise depend on the presence of specific oxides and amounts.
Is the glaze opaque or transparent? If it is a deep and vibrant color, especially one that is darker where the glaze is thicker, it is likely a transparent that contains a
colorant
that can be seen deep into the glass layer. If it has a pastel surface it likely contains a colorant plus has an
opacity
mechanism (contains an
opacifier
, is crystallizing, or is not completely melting). If it has a variation in coloration (without variation in thickness) then there may be some sort of crystallization going on to produce the color. If it is just white all over then it is opacified. If the white turns to transparent or different colored at contour edges, then crystallization is likely involved in the opacity mechanism (e.g. from
titanium dioxide
). Actually, just look at the recipe. Does it have an opacifier like
tin oxide
,
titanium
or
zircopax
? Does it have a colorant like cobalt or
chrome oxide
? Non crystallizing
opacification
and color mechanisms will often transplant into another base.
Is the glaze variegated or
mottled
? If the effect is a result of the presence of
rutile
or titanium then transplant either material into the cone 6 base glaze.
Does the glaze have speckles that are a product of a granular or unground material? If so transplant these contributors into the new recipe. If the speckles blossom or bleed in the original you may need to choose a different specking agent for cone 6 (for example, use
granular manganese
instead of granular illmenite.
There are other factors that are not as easy to transplant. These often relate to visual effects in glazes that are very fluid or runny. For example, glazes that form small or large crystals or a crystal mesh across sections of the surface during cooling need to have a very fluid melt. Often matte cone 10 glazes are actually over-fired cone 6 or 8 glossy glazes that have completely crystallized. For this type of glaze you will need to have an equally fluid melt in the cone 6 range to transplant things into (that means it is going to need to melt well at cone 2-3). This will not be easy since getting a glaze to melt that low means removing much of the low expansion silica and alumina, that in turn leads to crazing.
Another mechanism that is not easy to transplant is the character of the surface. Dolomite matte glazes, for example, have a pleasant silky surface that is a product of what CaO and MgO do around cone 10 in slow firing in the right host glaze (by slow firing I mean over a period of hours rather than minutes as is common in industry). Obviously you cannot duplicate this exact mechanism because MgO does not suddenly melt at cone 6 the way it does at cone 10. You must create or find a base that already has the surface you want (or adjust one that is close since matteness is a product of the glazes chemistry, that is, the mix of oxides it contains). Fortunately, at cone 6 various types of matte surfaces are also possible. Additionally, you can actually use a mechanical technical to duplicate the dolomite matte effect: Apply a thin layer of
matte glaze
over a glossy under layer, the upper layer can
variegate
in a similar manner.
Method 2: Add the Magic Oxide
The magic oxide is boron (
B
2
O
3
). The reason boron is such an ideal additive is that it is more than a flux, it is a glass like silica, yet it melts low. This is a marvelous oxide! One of the beauties of boron is that it is compatible with most colorant, matte and
variegation
mechanisms. But there is another even more important reason: Boron has a low thermal expansion; additions of it will reduce
glaze crazing
. This is so important because most high temperature glazes contain far more
high-expansion
Na
2
O
,
K
2
O
than can be tolerated at cone 6 without producing crazing. In addition the
low-expansion
silica and alumina they contain must be reduced to achieve melting at cone 6, thus moving the glaze toward crazing.
The next questions is: What source of boron should you use? The answer is: frits. There is a
boron frit
out there to meet almost any fluxing challenge. However each
frit
contributes other oxides besides boron. This means that to reach the goal of only increasing the boron in a glaze you need to be able to reduce other materials in the recipe that contribute the same non-boron oxides as the frit. Thus, to do what I am about to describe, you need a
glaze chemistry
. The kinds of material juggling I am about to describe are dealt with in the videos on
digitalfire
.com.
The first thing to consider is this: Does the glaze need clay (does it settle in the bucket or lack dry hardness?) or does it have too much clay already (does it shrink and crack on drying?).
If the former, use something like Ferro
Frit 3134
(20% CaO 10% Na
2
O, 23% B
2
O
3
, 46%
SiO
2
). Why? Since it contributes Na
2
O and CaO, that means you will be able to reduce the amount of feldspar and whiting/dolomite/wollastonite in the glaze (a pre-melted frit melts so much better than any of these materials). That reduction will also mean a loss of
Al
2
O
3
, but since the frit contains none you will be able to supply the Al
2
O
3
using a
kaolin
.
If the glaze already has too much clay, then use
Frit 3124
, it has almost the same chemistry, but it sources alumina also (meaning you can reduce alumina-contributing clay). If the amount of clay in the glaze is OK, then try
Frit 3195
, it is balanced enough to be a glaze in itself.
The second last question is: What level should the Al
2
O
3
and SiO
2
be at in the newly adjusted glaze? An obvious suggestion might be to adjust them to about 2/3 of what they were. However, a rule of thumb is to always have as much alumina and silica as you can in a glaze. But, since B
2
O
3
(boron) performs the same function as silica you can afford to have lower SiO
2
in the interests of good melting. Also, boron has very good alumina-dissolving abilities, thus it is often possible to leave Al
2
O
3
at the same levels as it was in the cone 10 glaze. Boron is really great stuff!
The last question is: How much boron do I add? I would start with about 0.3 molar equivalents. If the glaze is reactive and has to be very runny to achieve the desired effect (like the ones in the book "Mastering Glazes"), you might have to take the boron as high as 0.8.
Some Other Points
If the cone 10 glaze is a stoney matte and is not melting enough, then to duplicate it faithfully I guess you have to make a cone 6 glaze that is not really melting enough either. However this is certainly not advisable for functional ware. You will want to fire tests to compare the degree if melting (consider using a
melt flow tester
). Be sure to try the glaze in thick and thin layers and watch for crazing and
leaching
. Different minerals release their oxides to
the melt
at different temperatures, even though they might have similar chemistries (for example wollastonite and whiting both contribute CaO yet the latter requires a higher temperature to release it to the melt).
Common
Cone 10R
Glazes
Keep in mind that matte effects can be achieved by different mechanisms (e.g. Crystallization, incomplete melting,
phase separation
, prevention of surface level out by rivulet formation or melt stiffening due to the presence of refractory or non-dissolving components or oxides like Al
2
O
3
or
zircon
). Some of these mechanisms are a product of slow firing and thus not available in industry. Thus you need to select a matte of similar type to transfer properly. Keep in mind that colorants can affect matteness depending on the fragility of the effect (if you have used matte glazes for a long time you will know what I mean by this).
White matte: Just
opacify
the G1414Z matte base using Zircopax or tin oxide.
Silky matte: Use the
G2934
silky matte base (or one of its even better
fritted
variants e.g.
G2934Y
).
Tenmoku: Use iron or a stain in a high-boron fluid melt base like
G3806C
(or one of its variants like
G3806E
or
G3806F
). However you will not get the same light brown crystal lines on the edges of contours. However, like many any such special effects, this can be synthesized using an overlay of the brown color. Note that at cone 6 this type of glaze can crystallize to a yellowish color (rather than maroon) if cooled too slowly.
Robins Egg blue: Add a little Mason 6364 to the
G2934Y
base silky matte glaze.
Black: Add a black stain (e.g. Mason 6600) to a clear glossy or matte glaze.
Purple/Lavender: Add Mason 6304 to
G2934Y
matte or
G2926B
glossy.
Celadon: Add a green celadon stain or copper oxide/carbonate to the
G3806E
or F clear base.
Oatmeal/Cream: Add some iron, a light brown stain or rutile (rutile will also variegate it) to
G1214Z
or G2934Y. Add a little Zircopax to opacify if necessary (to bring out the pastel effect).
Related Information
In pigmented glossy transparent glazes
The pigment is the opacifier
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
This is a
cone 6
oxidation transparent glaze having enough
flux
(from a
boron frit
) to make it melt very well, that is why it is running and pooling.
Iron oxide
has been added (around 5%), producing this transparent amber effect. Darker coloration occurs where the glaze has run thicker (because it absorbs more light). This simple
mechanism
enables the glaze to automatically highlight contours, emboss and textures on the underlying surface. This mechanism works with any color in almost any transparent
base glaze
, as long as bubble
clouding
and
crystallization
do not occur. Entire lines of
commercial glazes
(e.g. AMACO Celadons) are based on this mechanism and potters prize it (industry doesn't like it because it is difficult to achieve consistency).
This glaze relies on high levels of
K
2
O
and
Na
2
O
to produce the brilliant gloss, however the side effect of that is
crazing
. These are sourced by
feldspars
,
nepheline syenite
and are high in certain
frits
. To achieve this effect, recipes must rely on other fluxes like
boron
, lithium or zinc.
Links
Articles
A Low Cost Tester of Glaze Melt Fluidity
Use this novel device to compare the
melt fluidity
of glazes and materials. Simple physical observations of the results provide a better understanding of the fired properties of your glaze (and problems you did not see before).
Articles
What Determines a Glaze's Firing Temperature?
The
oxides
contributed by glaze materials determine its
chemistry
. The chemistry is the main factor determining melting behaviour. But the
particle sizes
, shapes and mineralogies also come in to play.
Articles
A Textbook Cone 6 Matte Glaze With Problems
Glazes must be completely melted to be
functional
, hard and strong. Many are not. This compares two glazes to make the difference clear.
Projects
Temperatures
URLs
https://sketchfab.com/models/999eaa40074c4447a90e92229b7b1857?utm_source=triggered-emails&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=model-upload#share
Melt Flow Tester
3D Scan
STL
file at SketchFab
Glossary
High Temperature Glaze
Glossary
Medium Temperature
These are
stoneware
glazes that fire in the range of 1200C (
2200F
). They often contain
boron
to assist with melting.
Glossary
Low Temperature Glaze
In
ceramics
, glazes are loosely classified as low, medium and high temperature. Low temperature is in the cone 06-2 range (about 1800F-2000F).
Glossary
Base Glaze
Understand your a glaze and learn how to adjust and improve it. Build others from that. We have bases for low, medium and high fire.
Recipes
G2926B - Cone 6 Whiteware/Porcelain transparent glaze
A
base transparent
glaze recipe created by
Tony Hansen
, it fires high gloss and ultra clear with low melt mobility.
Recipes
G1214Z1 - Cone 6 Silky CaO matte base glaze
This glaze was born as a demonstration of how to use
chemistry
to convert a glossy
cone 6
glaze into a matte.
Recipes
G2934 - Matte Glaze Base for Cone 6
A base
MgO
matte glaze
recipe fires to a hard utilitarian surface and has very good working properties. Blend in the glossy if it is too matte.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy