Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Articles
A ChatBot gives jaw-dropping glaze recipe advice - Jan 2025
A Low Cost Tester of Glaze Melt Fluidity
A One-speed Lab or Studio Slurry Mixer
A Textbook Cone 6 Matte Glaze With Problems
Adjusting Glaze Expansion by Calculation to Solve Shivering
Alberta Slip, 20 Years of Substitution for Albany Slip
An Overview of Ceramic Stains
Are You in Control of Your Production Process?
Are Your Glazes Food Safe or are They Leachable?
Attack on Glass: Corrosion Attack Mechanisms
Ball Milling Glazes, Bodies, Engobes
Binders for Ceramic Bodies
Bringing Out the Big Guns in Craze Control: MgO (G1215U)
Can We Help You Fix a Specific Problem?
Ceramic Glazes Today
Ceramic Material Nomenclature
Ceramic Tile Clay Body Formulation
Changing Our View of Glazes
Chemistry vs. Matrix Blending to Create Glazes from Native Materials
Concentrate on One Good Glaze
Copper Red Glazes
Crazing and Bacteria: Is There a Hazard?
Crazing in Stoneware Glazes: Treating the Causes, Not the Symptoms
Creating a Non-Glaze Ceramic Slip or Engobe
Creating Your Own Budget Glaze
Crystal Glazes: Understanding the Process and Materials
Deflocculants: A Detailed Overview
Demonstrating Glaze Fit Issues to Students
Diagnosing a Casting Problem at a Sanitaryware Plant
Drying Ceramics Without Cracks
Duplicating Albany Slip
Duplicating AP Green Fireclay
Electric Hobby Kilns: What You Need to Know
Fighting the Glaze Dragon
Firing Clay Test Bars
Firing: What Happens to Ceramic Ware in a Firing Kiln
First You See It Then You Don't: Raku Glaze Stability
Fixing a glaze that does not stay in suspension
Formulating a body using clays native to your area
Formulating a Clear Glaze Compatible with Chrome-Tin Stains
Formulating a Porcelain
Formulating Ash and Native-Material Glazes
G1214M Cone 5-7 20x5 glossy transparent glaze
G1214W Cone 6 transparent glaze
G1214Z Cone 6 matte glaze
G1916M Cone 06-04 transparent glaze
Getting the Glaze Color You Want: Working With Stains
Glaze and Body Pigments and Stains in the Ceramic Tile Industry
Glaze Chemistry Basics - Formula, Analysis, Mole%, Unity
Glaze chemistry using a frit of approximate analysis
Glaze Recipes: Formulate and Make Your Own Instead
Glaze Types, Formulation and Application in the Tile Industry
Having Your Glaze Tested for Toxic Metal Release
High Gloss Glazes
Hire Us for a 3D Printing Project
How a Material Chemical Analysis is Done
How desktop INSIGHT Deals With Unity, LOI and Formula Weight
How to Find and Test Your Own Native Clays
I have always done it this way!
Inkjet Decoration of Ceramic Tiles
Is Your Fired Ware Safe?
Leaching Cone 6 Glaze Case Study
Limit Formulas and Target Formulas
Low Budget Testing of Ceramic Glazes
Make Your Own Ball Mill Stand
Making Glaze Testing Cones
Monoporosa or Single Fired Wall Tiles
Organic Matter in Clays: Detailed Overview
Outdoor Weather Resistant Ceramics
Painting Glazes Rather Than Dipping or Spraying
Particle Size Distribution of Ceramic Powders
Porcelain Tile, Vitrified Tile
Rationalizing Conflicting Opinions About Plasticity
Ravenscrag Slip is Born
Recylcing Scrap Clay
Reducing the Firing Temperature of a Glaze From Cone 10 to 6
Setting up a Clay Testing Program in Your Company or Studio
Simple Physical Testing of Clays
Single Fire Glazing
Soluble Salts in Minerals: Detailed Overview
Some Keys to Dealing With Firing Cracks
Stoneware Casting Body Recipes
Substituting Cornwall Stone
Super-Refined Terra Sigillata
The Chemistry, Physics and Manufacturing of Glaze Frits
The Effect of Glaze Fit on Fired Ware Strength
The Four Levels on Which to View Ceramic Glazes
The Majolica Earthenware Process
The Potter's Prayer
The Right Chemistry for a Cone 6 Magnesia Matte
The Trials of Being the Only Technical Person in the Club
The Whining Stops Here: A Realistic Look at Clay Bodies
Those Unlabelled Bags and Buckets
Tiles and Mosaics for Potters
Toxicity of Firebricks Used in Ovens
Trafficking in Glaze Recipes
Understanding Ceramic Materials
Understanding Ceramic Oxides
Understanding Glaze Slurry Properties
Understanding the Deflocculation Process in Slip Casting
Understanding the Terra Cotta Slip Casting Recipes In North America
Understanding Thermal Expansion in Ceramic Glazes
Unwanted Crystallization in a Cone 6 Glaze
Using Dextrin, Glycerine and CMC Gum together
Volcanic Ash
What Determines a Glaze's Firing Temperature?
What is a Mole, Checking Out the Mole
What is the Glaze Dragon?
Where do I start in understanding glazes?
Why Textbook Glazes Are So Difficult
Working with children
The Four Levels on Which to View Ceramic Glazes
Description
By knowing which level to view a glaze from you are much better equipped to understand and control it. The levels are process, recipe, material, oxide.
Article
Glazing is perhaps the most difficult aspect of
ceramics
and the one for which you bear the most accountability (for design,  functionality, and safety). It is important to know 'why' glazes do what they do. It is better to 'understand' and control a few glazes than struggle with many that end up controlling you. The traffic in
glaze recipes
and the trend toward abdicating control to suppliers and consultants, these mentalities breed ignorance and invite trouble. The answer is to formulate your own glazes.
To understand the complexities of glazes one must marshal several different viewpoints, that is, understand things on different levels. There is usually no one simple answer for formulating or fixing a glaze. We recommend you develop the ability to determine which level is most closely related to the problem at hand. Study the trouble shooting articles at the bottom on this page and note how thinking in terms of these four levels helps to formulate questions that lead to solutions.
The Process Level
The technician immerses himself in understanding the equipment used to apply, dry, decorate, fire, and cool the ware. By fine tuning these devices he exercises considerable control over standard plant or studio recipes or glazes purchased ready made from suppliers. When problems arise he/she analyses them mainly in terms of changes he can make to the process.
The Recipe Level
The technician test mixes many glaze recipes or commercially prepared glazes hoping to find one that 'appears' to be visually suitable. When problems are encountered, a recipe is often discarded and the pursuit of another begins. On this level little is learned when a recipe does not work properly.
Leaching
and
crazing
'consciences' tend to be underdeveloped. People trapped in this culture tend to feel quite helpless, glazes are 'mysterious' to them. Many want to have guaranteed solutions handed to them yet they are very tolerant of touchy, difficult, and expensive recipes. Many believe the 'fool proof' recipe is just around the corner.
The Material Level
The technician learns what materials do when fired and uses trial and error blending to produce glazes. He is able to achieve a degree control over the fired visual character and gains confidence. Much more is learned when glazes do not fire as expected. The physical working properties of glazes can be rationalized according to the properties of the components and adjustments made to improve application or mixing properties while maintaining fired characteristics. This approach is particularly applicable to decorative and non-functional products where the pursuit of interesting surfaces is very important. However this method falls short when it comes to producing
functional
surfaces and exercising greater control of diverse fired properties. Material level formulation tends to perpetuate the acceptance of results based on visual appearance only.
Flux
saturated glazes are examples of the products of this approach, yet they are usually unstable against chemical or mechanical attack.
The Oxide Level
The technician understands the function of
oxides
, the building blocks of the final fired glass. He has much greater control of many fired properties that are related directly to specific oxides or oxide systems. When problems occur this level often teaches valuable lessons that can be applied to solve current and future problems. When both the material and oxide levels are considered the technician can achieve a measure of 'material independence' (he can choose what mix of materials is best to supply a given formula of oxides). While things like
blistering
and
crawling
can be understood best by considering both the material and oxide mix of a glaze, issues like crazing and color development can only be fully grasped by consideration at this level. Each oxide has well documented contributions and interactions with others in the fired glass and proper understanding of the oxide level provides strategies for dealing with all kinds of glaze properties (i.e. hardness, surface character, crystal development, chemical stability).
We encourage you to learn about materials and ceramic calculations.
Related Information
The Dragon
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
This is how we personify the challenges facing willfully non-technical ceramic technicians. He is not as harmless as he looks. And he is not out for your best interests.
Links
Projects
Oxides
Projects
Recipes
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy