Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Articles
A ChatBot gives jaw-dropping glaze recipe advice - Jan 2025
A Low Cost Tester of Glaze Melt Fluidity
A One-speed Lab or Studio Slurry Mixer
A Textbook Cone 6 Matte Glaze With Problems
Adjusting Glaze Expansion by Calculation to Solve Shivering
Alberta Slip, 20 Years of Substitution for Albany Slip
An Overview of Ceramic Stains
Are You in Control of Your Production Process?
Are Your Glazes Food Safe or are They Leachable?
Attack on Glass: Corrosion Attack Mechanisms
Ball Milling Glazes, Bodies, Engobes
Binders for Ceramic Bodies
Bringing Out the Big Guns in Craze Control: MgO (G1215U)
Can We Help You Fix a Specific Problem?
Ceramic Glazes Today
Ceramic Material Nomenclature
Ceramic Tile Clay Body Formulation
Changing Our View of Glazes
Chemistry vs. Matrix Blending to Create Glazes from Native Materials
Concentrate on One Good Glaze
Copper Red Glazes
Crazing and Bacteria: Is There a Hazard?
Crazing in Stoneware Glazes: Treating the Causes, Not the Symptoms
Creating a Non-Glaze Ceramic Slip or Engobe
Creating Your Own Budget Glaze
Crystal Glazes: Understanding the Process and Materials
Deflocculants: A Detailed Overview
Demonstrating Glaze Fit Issues to Students
Diagnosing a Casting Problem at a Sanitaryware Plant
Drying Ceramics Without Cracks
Duplicating Albany Slip
Duplicating AP Green Fireclay
Electric Hobby Kilns: What You Need to Know
Fighting the Glaze Dragon
Firing Clay Test Bars
Firing: What Happens to Ceramic Ware in a Firing Kiln
First You See It Then You Don't: Raku Glaze Stability
Fixing a glaze that does not stay in suspension
Formulating a body using clays native to your area
Formulating a Clear Glaze Compatible with Chrome-Tin Stains
Formulating a Porcelain
Formulating Ash and Native-Material Glazes
G1214M Cone 5-7 20x5 glossy transparent glaze
G1214W Cone 6 transparent glaze
G1214Z Cone 6 matte glaze
G1916M Cone 06-04 transparent glaze
Getting the Glaze Color You Want: Working With Stains
Glaze and Body Pigments and Stains in the Ceramic Tile Industry
Glaze Chemistry Basics - Formula, Analysis, Mole%, Unity
Glaze chemistry using a frit of approximate analysis
Glaze Recipes: Formulate and Make Your Own Instead
Glaze Types, Formulation and Application in the Tile Industry
Having Your Glaze Tested for Toxic Metal Release
High Gloss Glazes
Hire Us for a 3D Printing Project
How a Material Chemical Analysis is Done
How desktop INSIGHT Deals With Unity, LOI and Formula Weight
How to Find and Test Your Own Native Clays
I have always done it this way!
Inkjet Decoration of Ceramic Tiles
Is Your Fired Ware Safe?
Leaching Cone 6 Glaze Case Study
Limit Formulas and Target Formulas
Low Budget Testing of Ceramic Glazes
Make Your Own Ball Mill Stand
Making Glaze Testing Cones
Monoporosa or Single Fired Wall Tiles
Organic Matter in Clays: Detailed Overview
Outdoor Weather Resistant Ceramics
Painting Glazes Rather Than Dipping or Spraying
Particle Size Distribution of Ceramic Powders
Porcelain Tile, Vitrified Tile
Rationalizing Conflicting Opinions About Plasticity
Ravenscrag Slip is Born
Recylcing Scrap Clay
Reducing the Firing Temperature of a Glaze From Cone 10 to 6
Setting up a Clay Testing Program in Your Company or Studio
Simple Physical Testing of Clays
Single Fire Glazing
Soluble Salts in Minerals: Detailed Overview
Some Keys to Dealing With Firing Cracks
Stoneware Casting Body Recipes
Substituting Cornwall Stone
Super-Refined Terra Sigillata
The Chemistry, Physics and Manufacturing of Glaze Frits
The Effect of Glaze Fit on Fired Ware Strength
The Four Levels on Which to View Ceramic Glazes
The Majolica Earthenware Process
The Potter's Prayer
The Right Chemistry for a Cone 6 Magnesia Matte
The Trials of Being the Only Technical Person in the Club
The Whining Stops Here: A Realistic Look at Clay Bodies
Those Unlabelled Bags and Buckets
Tiles and Mosaics for Potters
Toxicity of Firebricks Used in Ovens
Trafficking in Glaze Recipes
Understanding Ceramic Materials
Understanding Ceramic Oxides
Understanding Glaze Slurry Properties
Understanding the Deflocculation Process in Slip Casting
Understanding the Terra Cotta Slip Casting Recipes In North America
Understanding Thermal Expansion in Ceramic Glazes
Unwanted Crystallization in a Cone 6 Glaze
Using Dextrin, Glycerine and CMC Gum together
Volcanic Ash
What Determines a Glaze's Firing Temperature?
What is a Mole, Checking Out the Mole
What is the Glaze Dragon?
Where do I start in understanding glazes?
Why Textbook Glazes Are So Difficult
Working with children
Understanding Ceramic Oxides
Description
Fired glazes are composed of oxide building blocks. Each of the oxides contributes different properties to the fired glaze and interacts with others in different ways. Understanding these gives you control.
Article
The ancient Chinese thought of glazes as being made of bones, flesh, and blood. They were very perceptive! The
silica
content of a glaze acts like a framework, the alumina acts to give it body, and the fluxes melt it and impart character acting as the lifeblood.
In understanding fired properties, it is helpful to view materials as sources of
oxides
. However, remember that although it is chemically possible to supply a given oxide from many materials, often other factors make one of them preferable. For example,
kaolin
is an ideal source of alumina since it also imparts
suspension
and hardening properties to the glaze
slurry
.
Following is a list of the major oxides. There are a multitude of textbooks with more information on this subject. However, the data is widely scattered and thus difficult to study. The best source of information is the oxides area on this website.Not only is each oxide described in detail but properties are assigned so that it can be searched by category. For example, if you need to produce purple you can look up the 'purple' property area and see a list of all the chemistries that produce it.
Major Oxides
SiO
2
- Silicon dioxide is supplied by silica,
feldspar
, and kaolin. It is the principle glass forming oxide and normally comprises more than 60% of most glazes and clays. It has a
low expansion
and high
melting temperature
.
Al
2
O
3
- Aluminum oxide is supplied by kaolin and feldspar. It combines well with silica and
basic oxides
to give body,
durability
, and stability to glazes. It has a low expansion and high melting temperature.
B
2
O
3
- Boric oxide is supplied by
borax
frits
,
gerstley borate
, (or colemanite). It is a low temperature low expansion equivalent of silica.
CaO
- Calcium oxide is supplied by whiting, wollastonite, feldspar, colemanite, or
dolomite
. It is the principle
flux
in medium and high fire glazes. In higher amounts it can give matte qualities through the formation of calcium silicate crystals.
K
2
O
- Potassium oxide is supplied by potash feldspar and
cornwall stone
. It is an important auxiliary flux in high temperature glazes. It has a
high expansion
.
Na
2
O
- Sodium oxide is supplied by feldspar,
nepheline syenite
and sodium frits. A slightly more powerful flux than potassium for high temperature glazes. It has a high expansion.
MgO
- Magnesium oxide is supplied by
talc
or dolomite. At lower temperatures, it is a matting agent and opacifier; at higher temperatures, it is an active alkaline flux.
Fe
2
O
3
,
FeO
, Fe
3
O
4
- Ferrous-ferric oxide is supplied by
iron oxide
and stained clays. It is the most popular
colorant
. In a reducing atmosphere, it can act as a flux in both bodies and glazes at high temperatures.
ZnO
-
Zinc oxide
is available in a pure state. It is a low expansion secondary flux, in moderate to higher amounts it acts to produce mattes and
crystalline
surfaces.
TiO2
-
Titanium dioxide
is available pure or in
rutile
. It is a complex material because of its opacifying, crystallizing, and multitude of color responses.
ZrO
2
- Zirconium oxide is available in a pure state and is supplied by
zircon
opacifiers
. It is used to
opacity
glazes. Zirconium has a very low
thermal expansion
.
BaO
- Barium oxide is supplied by
barium carbonate
. It is a flux which encourages the growth of micro-crystals to produce attractive satin-matte surfaces. It also has unique color responses.
Li
2
O
- Lithium oxide is supplied by
lithium carbonate
or lithium feldspar (i.e.
spodumene
). It is a powerful auxiliary alkaline flux. Its expansion is lower than soda or potash.
PbO
- Lead oxide is supplied by lead frits. It reacts easily with silica to form low melting lead silicates of high gloss and deep character.
SrO
- Strontium oxide is supplied by
strontium carbonate
. It has matting and crystallizing properties similar to barium although it produces brighter and more fusible glazes with fewer surface defects.
Related Information
Ceramic Oxide Periodic Table
Pretty well all common traditional ceramic
base glazes
are made from less than a dozen elements (plus oxygen). Go to the full picture of this table and click or tap each of the
oxides
to learn more (on its page at
digitalfire
.com). When materials melt, they
decompose
, sourcing these elements in oxide form. The kiln builds the glaze from them, it does not care what material sources what oxide (assuming, of course, that all materials do melt or dissolve completely into
the melt
to release those oxides). Each of these oxides contributes specific properties to the glass. So, you can look at a formula and make a good prediction of the properties of the fired glaze. And know what specific oxide to increase or decrease to move a property in a given direction (e.g. melting behavior, hardness,
durability
,
thermal expansion
, color, gloss,
crystallization
). And know about how they interact (affecting each other). This is powerful. A lot of ceramic materials are available, hundreds - that is complicated when individual materials source multiple oxides. Viewing a glaze as a simple
unity formula
of ceramic oxides is just simpler.
Links
Projects
Oxides
Projects
Properties
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy