Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Articles
A ChatBot gives jaw-dropping glaze recipe advice - Jan 2025
A Low Cost Tester of Glaze Melt Fluidity
A One-speed Lab or Studio Slurry Mixer
A Textbook Cone 6 Matte Glaze With Problems
Adjusting Glaze Expansion by Calculation to Solve Shivering
Alberta Slip, 20 Years of Substitution for Albany Slip
An Overview of Ceramic Stains
Are You in Control of Your Production Process?
Are Your Glazes Food Safe or are They Leachable?
Attack on Glass: Corrosion Attack Mechanisms
Ball Milling Glazes, Bodies, Engobes
Binders for Ceramic Bodies
Bringing Out the Big Guns in Craze Control: MgO (G1215U)
Can We Help You Fix a Specific Problem?
Ceramic Glazes Today
Ceramic Material Nomenclature
Ceramic Tile Clay Body Formulation
Changing Our View of Glazes
Chemistry vs. Matrix Blending to Create Glazes from Native Materials
Concentrate on One Good Glaze
Copper Red Glazes
Crazing and Bacteria: Is There a Hazard?
Crazing in Stoneware Glazes: Treating the Causes, Not the Symptoms
Creating a Non-Glaze Ceramic Slip or Engobe
Creating Your Own Budget Glaze
Crystal Glazes: Understanding the Process and Materials
Deflocculants: A Detailed Overview
Demonstrating Glaze Fit Issues to Students
Diagnosing a Casting Problem at a Sanitaryware Plant
Drying Ceramics Without Cracks
Duplicating Albany Slip
Duplicating AP Green Fireclay
Electric Hobby Kilns: What You Need to Know
Fighting the Glaze Dragon
Firing Clay Test Bars
Firing: What Happens to Ceramic Ware in a Firing Kiln
First You See It Then You Don't: Raku Glaze Stability
Fixing a glaze that does not stay in suspension
Formulating a body using clays native to your area
Formulating a Clear Glaze Compatible with Chrome-Tin Stains
Formulating a Porcelain
Formulating Ash and Native-Material Glazes
G1214M Cone 5-7 20x5 glossy transparent glaze
G1214W Cone 6 transparent glaze
G1214Z Cone 6 matte glaze
G1916M Cone 06-04 transparent glaze
Getting the Glaze Color You Want: Working With Stains
Glaze and Body Pigments and Stains in the Ceramic Tile Industry
Glaze Chemistry Basics - Formula, Analysis, Mole%, Unity
Glaze chemistry using a frit of approximate analysis
Glaze Recipes: Formulate and Make Your Own Instead
Glaze Types, Formulation and Application in the Tile Industry
Having Your Glaze Tested for Toxic Metal Release
High Gloss Glazes
Hire Us for a 3D Printing Project
How a Material Chemical Analysis is Done
How desktop INSIGHT Deals With Unity, LOI and Formula Weight
How to Find and Test Your Own Native Clays
I have always done it this way!
Inkjet Decoration of Ceramic Tiles
Is Your Fired Ware Safe?
Leaching Cone 6 Glaze Case Study
Limit Formulas and Target Formulas
Low Budget Testing of Ceramic Glazes
Make Your Own Ball Mill Stand
Making Glaze Testing Cones
Monoporosa or Single Fired Wall Tiles
Organic Matter in Clays: Detailed Overview
Outdoor Weather Resistant Ceramics
Painting Glazes Rather Than Dipping or Spraying
Particle Size Distribution of Ceramic Powders
Porcelain Tile, Vitrified Tile
Rationalizing Conflicting Opinions About Plasticity
Ravenscrag Slip is Born
Recylcing Scrap Clay
Reducing the Firing Temperature of a Glaze From Cone 10 to 6
Setting up a Clay Testing Program in Your Company or Studio
Simple Physical Testing of Clays
Single Fire Glazing
Soluble Salts in Minerals: Detailed Overview
Some Keys to Dealing With Firing Cracks
Stoneware Casting Body Recipes
Substituting Cornwall Stone
Super-Refined Terra Sigillata
The Chemistry, Physics and Manufacturing of Glaze Frits
The Effect of Glaze Fit on Fired Ware Strength
The Four Levels on Which to View Ceramic Glazes
The Majolica Earthenware Process
The Potter's Prayer
The Right Chemistry for a Cone 6 Magnesia Matte
The Trials of Being the Only Technical Person in the Club
The Whining Stops Here: A Realistic Look at Clay Bodies
Those Unlabelled Bags and Buckets
Tiles and Mosaics for Potters
Toxicity of Firebricks Used in Ovens
Trafficking in Glaze Recipes
Understanding Ceramic Materials
Understanding Ceramic Oxides
Understanding Glaze Slurry Properties
Understanding the Deflocculation Process in Slip Casting
Understanding the Terra Cotta Slip Casting Recipes In North America
Understanding Thermal Expansion in Ceramic Glazes
Unwanted Crystallization in a Cone 6 Glaze
Using Dextrin, Glycerine and CMC Gum together
Volcanic Ash
What Determines a Glaze's Firing Temperature?
What is a Mole, Checking Out the Mole
What is the Glaze Dragon?
Where do I start in understanding glazes?
Why Textbook Glazes Are So Difficult
Working with children
Why Textbook Glazes Are So Difficult
Description
The trade is glaze recipes has spawned generations of potters going up blind alleys trying recipes that don't work and living with ones that are much more trouble than they are worth. It is time to leave this behind and take control.
Article
If you are like me you have racks
of test samples that never quite worked
These recipes used to be in textbooks, now they are in computer databases and on the web. But most still do not work! So many potters and companies simply buy prepared glazes. In fact, recent years have seen an explosion in the number of small manufacturers of prepared glazes. 
Yet, there are still lots of masochists out there that are determined to make their own glazes and continue on their quest to find that perfect glaze just by trying textbook recipes at random. I want to make my own glazes but I am not a masochist and I do not need faith. Like me, more and more ceramic artists and technicians are saying "I am at the stage now where I want to know why, I want to understand glazes so I can fix and adjust and even formulate my own". I want to make  my own glazes either from scratch or adjust an existing base, it is the only way I will get what I really want. And it is alot less expensive.
It can take new potters years to get textbook glazes out of their system. However, experience soon teaches us that these glazes seldom behave, and they are frequently touchy and introduce more problems than they solve. Sometimes people claim to have found useful glazes that work well in their circumstances. But how well? The glaze may fire to the surface they want, but what other problems and quirks do they have to endure with it that they simply overlook and tolerate. Perhaps you will agree that textbook quests don't normally breed intimate knowledge of how glazes work or even that they can be adjusted and controlled.
A good glaze is a little like a good dog. It is best to raise your own from a pup rather than trying to adopt someone else's full grown hound. Let's consider some of the reasons why a textbook glaze might not "travel" very well. As we will see, much more goes into achieving a particular glaze effect then just weighing it,
throwing
in some water, and slapping it on the ware. I'm not trying to discourage the use of all
glaze recipes
that you might import into your studio or business but I am saying a few words of warning.
If your raw materials are different, then your version of the glaze can hardly be expected to match the author's. Remember that chemical or mineral names can be used loosely. There are thousands of different distinct minerals and grades of minerals available under an umbrella of a few dozen different generic names. The
feldspar
available to the glaze author may be quite different than yours. Ball clays vary across one quarry site; never mind what they do in different parts of the country. There are many different
kaolin
products and their
physical properties
, especially, vary widely. Very common materials like
talc
, whiting, and
dolomite
are available in more and less consistent versions, and some manufacturers stretch the definition of a mineral name to market their odd-ball product. Likewise, the particle size of flux-sourcing materials will have a marked effect on their reactivity and the
particle sizes
of
refractory
materials on their readiness to dissolve in
the melt
. Physical property differences in the materials may affect the way the glaze applies, the thickness it wants to be, the
laydown
density, tendency to settle and separate in the bucket, etc; these all affect the fired product. Special purpose glazes do not tolerate travelling nearly as well.
The glaze recipe may depend on a volatile or touchy
mechanism
(a
eutectic
, a matte surface, crystal development, color response to a specific
chemistry
), on a tight balance of
oxides
, a certain
mineral phase
or particle size profile in one of the materials, a particular
firing schedule
, or some special preparation or application technique. The author may be unaware that the glaze is "on the edge" in any respect, and has never seen reason to test various temperatures, methods, material substitutions or oxide variations. Inabilities of a glaze to survive these kinds of variations will show up in your studio or factory.
Many (or most) glazes are dramatically affected by the nature of the clay they are applied to.
Porcelain
reacts little with overlying glazes, whereas stonewares, especially those with iron and added fluxes and
silica
, can react strongly with a glaze, changing its appearance considerably. Often, the whiter, smoother, and more
mature
the clay body; the more vivid and brighter a glaze will be. Conversely, the darker, coarser, and more immature the body; the more subdued and dry the glaze will be. But, this is not always the case, some glazes come alive on dark burning bodies. If there is no information about how the glaze reacts to different types of clay bodies; then just about anything could happen when you try it on yours.
A glaze can be very sensitive to temperature and cooling cycle. Some glazes produce a matte of one color if cooled slowly and a gloss of another color if cooled quickly. Different types of kilns have their own characteristic cooling curves and if yours is different than the author's, your version of his or her glaze will be also. What are the chances that you have the same interpretation on how to read cones or that your
thermocouples
are both performing the same? Think also about your
kiln controller
: Just because a kiln is programmed to heat up or cool down at a certain rate, that does not mean the elements and insulation characteristics will cooperate to produce that schedule, either in your kiln or that of the other person. How many glaze recipes do you see that come with
firing schedules
anyway?
Some glazes are very sensitive to thickness of application and whether they are on a vertical or horizontal surface. Therefore, you will want to develop a glaze testing tile that provides planes of both, as well as some
incised
lines and sharp edges to see how well the glaze covers these, and whether it highlights or masks the relief. Also, be aware that different application techniques like spraying, pouring, and painting can produce fired surfaces on the finished ware that are very different in character from what the small dipped samples indicated.
Is the author
ball milling
the glaze? If so, how long and how efficient is the mill? Many glazes are profoundly affected by milling, especially if they contain materials of coarser particle size.
Even if you find a glaze that looks great, it could well
craze
or
shiver
on your
clay body
, or else fit just poorly enough to considerably weaken
fired strength
. Doubtless, the author has not documented how to adjust its expansion. It is even possible that the author doesn't really care or even know about issues involving fired hardness or solubility of things like manganese or barium. What if the person has an undeveloped eye for fired quality in glazes and thus tolerates a measure of
pinholing
,
bubbling
,
blistering
, or immaturity? What if he has the recipe so loaded with clay that it crawls half the time, or uses no clay and is so powdery you can hardly handle or decorate the ware? These are all things that you may miss at first, but which later become painfully evident.
Unfortunately, these differences don't line up and politely hit you one at a time. It is likely that most of them will come into play in any attempt to transplant a glaze recipe into a new environment. The trouble is this: If you know how to "level the playing field" to get useful tests, then you can probably formulate glazes from your own native materials anyway.
"What about calculation?", you might ask. Every glaze has a formula of oxides, and it is true that
oxide formulas
travel a little easier than recipes, especially when accompanied by adequate documentation. Still, most of the above problems will come into play anyway because you still have to derive a recipe of materials to supply those oxides, and if you are smart enough to adjust a textbook glaze, then why bother. It is just easier to
make your own glazes
using materials native to your area.
Yes, there is something that travels even better than oxide formulas. It is the knowledge of what each oxide type contributes to a glaze, what each mineral type does to give it fired personality, and how they affect physical working properties. Each new recipe either confirms or fine tunes your existing oxide-effect knowledge, or educates you in the effects of its special purpose source materials (i.e.
colorants
,
opacifiers
, crystal forming agents) or unique formula (i.e. crystals from high
CaO
and low Al
2O
3 ). Each can be adapted to your own proven
base recipes
.
Add a smattering of line blending and trial and error adjustment, and you can make anything you want; adjust it any way you want. You can tell the glaze what to do. So why jump through hoops trying to pacify temperamental recipes that are always throwing ceramic tantrums in your kiln? You don't have to put up with that any more.
Related Information
Links
Recipes
MGBase6 - Zinc Semimatte Glossy Base Cone 6
From page 98 of Mastering Glazes book
Projects
Recipes
Articles
A Textbook Cone 6 Matte Glaze With Problems
Glazes must be completely melted to be
functional
, hard and strong. Many are not. This compares two glazes to make the difference clear.
Glossary
Glaze Recipes
Stop! Think! Do not get addicted to the
trafficking
in online
glaze recipes
. Learn to make your own or adjust/adapt/fix what you find online.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy