Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Articles
A ChatBot gives jaw-dropping glaze recipe advice - Jan 2025
A Low Cost Tester of Glaze Melt Fluidity
A One-speed Lab or Studio Slurry Mixer
A Textbook Cone 6 Matte Glaze With Problems
Adjusting Glaze Expansion by Calculation to Solve Shivering
Alberta Slip, 20 Years of Substitution for Albany Slip
An Overview of Ceramic Stains
Are You in Control of Your Production Process?
Are Your Glazes Food Safe or are They Leachable?
Attack on Glass: Corrosion Attack Mechanisms
Ball Milling Glazes, Bodies, Engobes
Binders for Ceramic Bodies
Bringing Out the Big Guns in Craze Control: MgO (G1215U)
Can We Help You Fix a Specific Problem?
Ceramic Glazes Today
Ceramic Material Nomenclature
Ceramic Tile Clay Body Formulation
Changing Our View of Glazes
Chemistry vs. Matrix Blending to Create Glazes from Native Materials
Concentrate on One Good Glaze
Copper Red Glazes
Crazing and Bacteria: Is There a Hazard?
Crazing in Stoneware Glazes: Treating the Causes, Not the Symptoms
Creating a Non-Glaze Ceramic Slip or Engobe
Creating Your Own Budget Glaze
Crystal Glazes: Understanding the Process and Materials
Deflocculants: A Detailed Overview
Demonstrating Glaze Fit Issues to Students
Diagnosing a Casting Problem at a Sanitaryware Plant
Drying Ceramics Without Cracks
Duplicating Albany Slip
Duplicating AP Green Fireclay
Electric Hobby Kilns: What You Need to Know
Fighting the Glaze Dragon
Firing Clay Test Bars
Firing: What Happens to Ceramic Ware in a Firing Kiln
First You See It Then You Don't: Raku Glaze Stability
Fixing a glaze that does not stay in suspension
Formulating a body using clays native to your area
Formulating a Clear Glaze Compatible with Chrome-Tin Stains
Formulating a Porcelain
Formulating Ash and Native-Material Glazes
G1214M Cone 5-7 20x5 glossy transparent glaze
G1214W Cone 6 transparent glaze
G1214Z Cone 6 matte glaze
G1916M Cone 06-04 transparent glaze
Getting the Glaze Color You Want: Working With Stains
Glaze and Body Pigments and Stains in the Ceramic Tile Industry
Glaze Chemistry Basics - Formula, Analysis, Mole%, Unity
Glaze chemistry using a frit of approximate analysis
Glaze Recipes: Formulate and Make Your Own Instead
Glaze Types, Formulation and Application in the Tile Industry
Having Your Glaze Tested for Toxic Metal Release
High Gloss Glazes
Hire Us for a 3D Printing Project
How a Material Chemical Analysis is Done
How desktop INSIGHT Deals With Unity, LOI and Formula Weight
How to Find and Test Your Own Native Clays
I have always done it this way!
Inkjet Decoration of Ceramic Tiles
Is Your Fired Ware Safe?
Leaching Cone 6 Glaze Case Study
Limit Formulas and Target Formulas
Low Budget Testing of Ceramic Glazes
Make Your Own Ball Mill Stand
Making Glaze Testing Cones
Monoporosa or Single Fired Wall Tiles
Organic Matter in Clays: Detailed Overview
Outdoor Weather Resistant Ceramics
Painting Glazes Rather Than Dipping or Spraying
Particle Size Distribution of Ceramic Powders
Porcelain Tile, Vitrified Tile
Rationalizing Conflicting Opinions About Plasticity
Ravenscrag Slip is Born
Recylcing Scrap Clay
Reducing the Firing Temperature of a Glaze From Cone 10 to 6
Setting up a Clay Testing Program in Your Company or Studio
Simple Physical Testing of Clays
Single Fire Glazing
Soluble Salts in Minerals: Detailed Overview
Some Keys to Dealing With Firing Cracks
Stoneware Casting Body Recipes
Substituting Cornwall Stone
Super-Refined Terra Sigillata
The Chemistry, Physics and Manufacturing of Glaze Frits
The Effect of Glaze Fit on Fired Ware Strength
The Four Levels on Which to View Ceramic Glazes
The Majolica Earthenware Process
The Potter's Prayer
The Right Chemistry for a Cone 6 Magnesia Matte
The Trials of Being the Only Technical Person in the Club
The Whining Stops Here: A Realistic Look at Clay Bodies
Those Unlabelled Bags and Buckets
Tiles and Mosaics for Potters
Toxicity of Firebricks Used in Ovens
Trafficking in Glaze Recipes
Understanding Ceramic Materials
Understanding Ceramic Oxides
Understanding Glaze Slurry Properties
Understanding the Deflocculation Process in Slip Casting
Understanding the Terra Cotta Slip Casting Recipes In North America
Understanding Thermal Expansion in Ceramic Glazes
Unwanted Crystallization in a Cone 6 Glaze
Using Dextrin, Glycerine and CMC Gum together
Volcanic Ash
What Determines a Glaze's Firing Temperature?
What is a Mole, Checking Out the Mole
What is the Glaze Dragon?
Where do I start in understanding glazes?
Why Textbook Glazes Are So Difficult
Working with children
Recylcing Scrap Clay
Description
Guidelines for collecting, reprocessing, testing and adjusting scrap recycle clay in a pottery or ceramics studio or production facility.
Article
In a production situation, procedures and equipment are generally in place to incorporate a percentage of scrap into fresh clay mixes or to use it for certain types of production. Let us then take on the other challenge: the art center or studio.
Collecting Scrap
Mix the biggest possible batch, this makes it worthwhile to test and decide how to use it.
Decide if you want to be strict, with separate collection containers and rules for the types of clay allowed into each. Or, since people do not tend to follow rules anyway, throw everything into one. Of course,
grog
clays will need a separate container.
A powerful mixer is important to be able to thoroughly mix batches into a thick and smooth
slurry
(so less water needs to be removed and they can be screened).
Take measures to assure that
plaster
bits or chunks do not get into any batches. If someone mechanical is at your disposal consider making a vibratory screen (then contamination becomes a non-issue).
Mixing porcelains and stonewares in scrap is not a problem. Or buff, white and brown bodies. The type of body you get is intuitive.
Testing the Batch
Test the batch:
Endeavour to describe what the scrap clay is (e.g. 'Fires medium to light tan,
vitreous
cone 5-6; very slick and smooth;
plasticity
a little low.'). Fire a small sample tile (if possible in hot, cold and normal spots in the kiln).
Dry shrinkage and plasticity:
Often it will be lower than the source bodies. Make a mug and pay attention to
throwing
to note if it is less plastic than usual. Attach a handle and watch how it performs in typical drying (look for cracks around handle joins or on the base). If it dries well and is lacking plasticity it can tolerate an addition of a 50:50 mix of
bentonite
:ball clay (often only 5% is needed). Shake the bentonite and
ball clay
together in a plastic bag to thoroughly mix them and sprinkle that onto the top of the slurry bucket and let soak before you power-mix it. Or, slurry the bentonite:ball clay and dewater it on a
plaster bat
and wedge it together with the scrap (beware, it can take days to dewater and is incredibly sticky). Since the percentage required is low it will have minimal impact on fired properties.
Glaze fit:
Try several glazes and stress-test tiles using an ice water/boiling water test to reveal any
crazing
or
shivering
. If glazes
craze
incorporate some
silica
in the scrap clay batch (e.g. 5%). This can be done by
slurrying
a 50:50 mix of silica:ball clay, dewatering and
wedging
together with the scrap. This will decrease
maturity
somewhat for high temperature bodies (more so for medium) but at only 5-10% the effect should be minimal.
Maturity:
If the scrap is a mix of medium and high fire stonewares and porcelains, then it could be too vitreous at cone 10 or too immature at
cone 6
. You will note this if the fired test pieces warp or bubble (too
mature
) or are weak and porous (immature). Reduce maturity by powder-sprinkling or
wedging in
a 50:50 mix of silica:ball clay or just
fireclay
(start with about 10%). Increase maturity by powder-sprinkling or wedging in a 50:50 mix of
feldspar
:ball clay (start with about 10%).
Sculpture clay:
If plasticity of the scrap is high it may tolerate grog or paper.
Wedge in
10-20% grog (e.g. 20-40 mesh) or incorporate paper fiber. If that cuts plasticity too much mix in some of the 50:50 bentonite:ball clay.
Color is not red enough:
Wedge in a 95:5 mix of
Redart
:Bentonite. Or add 1%
iron oxide
.
Soluble salts on the fired surface:
Add about 0.3%
barium carbonate
to the slurry.
If you have more than one scrap batch on hand and their descriptions show that they have complementary pluses and minuses in their properties, you can mix them.
Dewatering the Batch
This is not simple. For large batches a large
plaster table
is required. Having the thickest possible slurry reduces the demand on the table. Another method is to pour the slurry onto a canvas stretched over a wooden or metal frame and cover it with another canvas.
Safety
Dealing with scrap can be a dustry process so wear a mask when needed. A large mixer can be dangerous to use, be careful.
Related Information
Supercharge the plasticity of reclaimed clay using bentonite
Your browser does not support MP4 video.
If your reclaim is short (non-plastic) restore it by mixing in some
bentonite
- as little as 2 parts per 100 scrap (in dry form) is often plenty. Note however that bentonite is hyperplastic and won’t mix with water as a pure material. The preferred method is thus to dry out the scrap, crush it as much as possible, then mix in the bentonite as thoroughly as possible. Finally,
slake
it, propeller mix as a
slurry
,
sieve
if needed and then dewater on a
plaster table
.
In a wet climate, the previous method might not be practical. An alternative is to make a 50:50
ball clay
:bentonite powder mix, as demonstrated in the video. Thoroughly shake them together in a plastic bag (to separate the super-tiny bentonite particles),
slurry it up
and dewater to plastic form for
wedging
into plastic reclaim. There are issues, however. If the bentonite is high in
soluble salts
the slurry can leave a scum on your
plaster
batt (fixable using a
sandscreen
).
Blender mixing
is best but will demand much more water than typical body mixes. A third option is the use of pure ball clay, but 5-10% might be needed. Ball clay can be
blender mixed
using much less water but it will still take a long time to dewater and is super sticky in plastic form. And the percentage needed will likely impact body fired
maturity
, making it fire a little more porous.
Links
Glossary
Propeller Mixer
In ceramic studios, labs and classrooms, a good
propeller mixer
is essential for mixing glaze and body slurries.
Glossary
Plaster table
Essential in a pottery studio for dewatering reclaim clay, stiffening clay that is too soft or making your own
clay bodies
.
URLs
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0zXfghDNxUg
ShowerShelf.com vibratory screen that fits the top of a five-gallon bucket
The tank,
sieve
and vibration assembly are all in one piece that fits into the top of the bucket. This unit can handle 1.8SG
slurry
.
URLs
https://www.amazon.com/Vibration-3600RPM-Industrial-Asynchronous-Vibrator/dp/B07P5CLJLP/ref=sr_1_12?qid=1559306388
Industrial vibration motor at Amazon.com
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy