Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Articles
A ChatBot gives jaw-dropping glaze recipe advice - Jan 2025
A Low Cost Tester of Glaze Melt Fluidity
A One-speed Lab or Studio Slurry Mixer
A Textbook Cone 6 Matte Glaze With Problems
Adjusting Glaze Expansion by Calculation to Solve Shivering
Alberta Slip, 20 Years of Substitution for Albany Slip
An Overview of Ceramic Stains
Are You in Control of Your Production Process?
Are Your Glazes Food Safe or are They Leachable?
Attack on Glass: Corrosion Attack Mechanisms
Ball Milling Glazes, Bodies, Engobes
Binders for Ceramic Bodies
Bringing Out the Big Guns in Craze Control: MgO (G1215U)
Can We Help You Fix a Specific Problem?
Ceramic Glazes Today
Ceramic Material Nomenclature
Ceramic Tile Clay Body Formulation
Changing Our View of Glazes
Chemistry vs. Matrix Blending to Create Glazes from Native Materials
Concentrate on One Good Glaze
Copper Red Glazes
Crazing and Bacteria: Is There a Hazard?
Crazing in Stoneware Glazes: Treating the Causes, Not the Symptoms
Creating a Non-Glaze Ceramic Slip or Engobe
Creating Your Own Budget Glaze
Crystal Glazes: Understanding the Process and Materials
Deflocculants: A Detailed Overview
Demonstrating Glaze Fit Issues to Students
Diagnosing a Casting Problem at a Sanitaryware Plant
Drying Ceramics Without Cracks
Duplicating Albany Slip
Duplicating AP Green Fireclay
Electric Hobby Kilns: What You Need to Know
Fighting the Glaze Dragon
Firing Clay Test Bars
Firing: What Happens to Ceramic Ware in a Firing Kiln
First You See It Then You Don't: Raku Glaze Stability
Fixing a glaze that does not stay in suspension
Formulating a body using clays native to your area
Formulating a Clear Glaze Compatible with Chrome-Tin Stains
Formulating a Porcelain
Formulating Ash and Native-Material Glazes
G1214M Cone 5-7 20x5 glossy transparent glaze
G1214W Cone 6 transparent glaze
G1214Z Cone 6 matte glaze
G1916M Cone 06-04 transparent glaze
Getting the Glaze Color You Want: Working With Stains
Glaze and Body Pigments and Stains in the Ceramic Tile Industry
Glaze Chemistry Basics - Formula, Analysis, Mole%, Unity
Glaze chemistry using a frit of approximate analysis
Glaze Recipes: Formulate and Make Your Own Instead
Glaze Types, Formulation and Application in the Tile Industry
Having Your Glaze Tested for Toxic Metal Release
High Gloss Glazes
Hire Us for a 3D Printing Project
How a Material Chemical Analysis is Done
How desktop INSIGHT Deals With Unity, LOI and Formula Weight
How to Find and Test Your Own Native Clays
I have always done it this way!
Inkjet Decoration of Ceramic Tiles
Is Your Fired Ware Safe?
Leaching Cone 6 Glaze Case Study
Limit Formulas and Target Formulas
Low Budget Testing of Ceramic Glazes
Make Your Own Ball Mill Stand
Making Glaze Testing Cones
Monoporosa or Single Fired Wall Tiles
Organic Matter in Clays: Detailed Overview
Outdoor Weather Resistant Ceramics
Painting Glazes Rather Than Dipping or Spraying
Particle Size Distribution of Ceramic Powders
Porcelain Tile, Vitrified Tile
Rationalizing Conflicting Opinions About Plasticity
Ravenscrag Slip is Born
Recylcing Scrap Clay
Reducing the Firing Temperature of a Glaze From Cone 10 to 6
Setting up a Clay Testing Program in Your Company or Studio
Simple Physical Testing of Clays
Single Fire Glazing
Soluble Salts in Minerals: Detailed Overview
Some Keys to Dealing With Firing Cracks
Stoneware Casting Body Recipes
Substituting Cornwall Stone
Super-Refined Terra Sigillata
The Chemistry, Physics and Manufacturing of Glaze Frits
The Effect of Glaze Fit on Fired Ware Strength
The Four Levels on Which to View Ceramic Glazes
The Majolica Earthenware Process
The Potter's Prayer
The Right Chemistry for a Cone 6 Magnesia Matte
The Trials of Being the Only Technical Person in the Club
The Whining Stops Here: A Realistic Look at Clay Bodies
Those Unlabelled Bags and Buckets
Tiles and Mosaics for Potters
Toxicity of Firebricks Used in Ovens
Trafficking in Glaze Recipes
Understanding Ceramic Materials
Understanding Ceramic Oxides
Understanding Glaze Slurry Properties
Understanding the Deflocculation Process in Slip Casting
Understanding the Terra Cotta Slip Casting Recipes In North America
Understanding Thermal Expansion in Ceramic Glazes
Unwanted Crystallization in a Cone 6 Glaze
Using Dextrin, Glycerine and CMC Gum together
Volcanic Ash
What Determines a Glaze's Firing Temperature?
What is a Mole, Checking Out the Mole
What is the Glaze Dragon?
Where do I start in understanding glazes?
Why Textbook Glazes Are So Difficult
Working with children
Stoneware Casting Body Recipes
Description
Some starting recipes for stoneware and porcelain with information on how to adjust and adapt them
Article
Here are a couple of starting recipes for casting
stoneware
bodies. It is
assumed, of course, that you might need to make adjustments. Remember that
property adjustments are always on a trade-off basis. If you want a super white
body, for example, you are going to have to give up some working properties.
Maturity: For greater
vitrification
increase the
feldspar
by 5% and reduce
    the clay by the same and test (vice versa for less
vitreous
).
Thermal expansion: Increase the
silica
to kill
crazing
, reduce to
    eliminate
shivering
(remember that
ball clay
contains significant quartz).
Casting rate: Choose a larger particle size
kaolin
or ball clay for faster
    casting (there are large particle ball clays promoted for use in casting,
    note that these might be higher in iron). Don't struggle with a slow casting
slurry
, it is not worth it.
Whiteness: The ball clay and kolin are both clays. Minimize ball clay in
    favor of white burning kaolins to whiten, but watch for losses in dry
    strength or ability of ware to pull away from the mold. There are many
    different kaolins with an array of advantages and disadvantages. The ones
    that are good for plastic porcelains will often impede working properties of
    a
casting slip
because of their fine particle size. For optimal whiteness
    remove the ball clay entirely and use all kaolin.
Translucency: Use clay materials having minimal
titanium
content and use
    more feldspar for better melting.
Once you get a feel for why each of the materials is in a
porcelain
or
stoneware body you will find that balancing all of the factors involved will
lead you toward only one possible recipe. For example, you need enough silica so
glazes will not
craze
and enough feldspar to vitrify the body. That leaves the
remainder for clay which you can mix and match for your needs. If two
researchers are given a clear description of the properties needed in a
porcelain, the way it will be fired and the set of materials to work with they
will come up with the same recipe.
Cone 6 Porcelain Clay Slip
Silica
15.0
Ball clay
19.0
Kaolin
19.0
Nepheline Syenite
45.0
Talc
2.0
Talc is not a strong
flux
at
cone 6
, but for some reason small amounts can
have a marked effect on the development of
maturity
(only 1% can reduce the
porosity
by 1%). At cone 6 it takes a lot of feldspar to vitrify the body,
nearly twice as much as for cone 10. This recipe will
deflocculate
to 1.8
specific gravity
and will fire to produce
vitrified
ware that is extremely
strong and durable compared to typical
artware
. It has a long firing range and
can produce ware of excellent
translucency
with clays of low titanium content.
Cone 10 Whiteware Clay Slip
Silica
25.0
Ball clay
25.0
Kaolin
25.0
Feldspar or Nepheline Syenite
25.0
At cone 10 much less feldspar is needed. Thus there is more room for clay and
silica in the recipe. If you decide to reduce the ball clay in favor of kaolin,
remember that the former contributes quite a bit of quartz and thus glazes might
craze. To compensate you might have to increase the silica to 30.
Deflocculation
Deflocculation refers to the magic process of creating a slurry with only
half the amount of water that would normally be necessary (see the link to an article on this topic). Generally you measure the water and put it into a
container, start your
propeller mixer
and add most but not all of the
deflocculant. Then you add the powder body mix. The slurry becomes very heavy so
you need a powerful mixer than can run for hours. Getting the last bit of powder
to mix in can take some time so patience is required.
Powder Mix
100
Water
36.0% of dry amt
Soda Ash
0.05-.1% of dry amt
Sodium Silicate
about 0.2 to 0.3% of dry amt
or
Water
36% of dry amt
Darvan
0.5% of dry amt
Note that water and deflocculant amounts are examples, you need to know how
to measure specific gravity and
viscosity
to adapt their amounts to your
materials and water (see the article on
deflocculation
for more information).
Comparison to
Low Fire
Artware Casting Bodies
I emphasize again that these bodies are not as robust as a ball clay:talc low
fire casting slip used in the hobby casting industry. These bodies will present
more mold release problems,
green strength
will be lower, and you simply will
not be able to use some of the molds that work well with
talc
slip. Also, it is
important to have molds that have smooth surfaces; rough porous surfaces provide
too many places for the slip to 'hang on' and you will have even more release
problems. If necessary do a dusting of talc on problem mold areas where pieces
will not release. If pieces do not have the strength to shrink away from the
mold without pulling apart consider using a plastic kaolin (e.g. #6 Tile). These
will greatly increase the strength (don't assume a kaolin is plastic because
people tell you it is,
slurry up
, dewater and evaluate the ones you have to
determine which is most plastic).
Brown Burning Casting Bodies
It is generally best not to use
iron oxide
additions, they tend to gel the
slurry. Rather, employ a high iron clay like the American
Redart
, Banta or
Carbondale materials in place of some or all of the ball clay and kaolin.
When Money is No Object
If you are willing to spend extra money you can greatly improve your casting
slip. For example, it is amazing how much zirconium silicate additions can
whiten the fired product. Likewise, the use of micro-fine
calcined alumina
instead of silica will drastically increase
fired strength
and whiteness and
reduce
thermal expansion
. The use of a body
frit
will enable you to make a lower
firing body. Blue stain can be added to brighten color or a decolorizer like
antimony can be added to cancel the browning effect of iron. If you have a kiln
that will go to cone 20 you can remove most of the feldspar and add other things
that impart properties you want. If you know alot about firing and have a kiln
in which you can control the gases in the atmosphere you can do some amazing
things. There is no real limit to creativity in developing porcelain recipes.
Dental porcelain, for example, is a mix of nearly 100% frit, it has almost no
plasticity
. However it vitrifies at below the
bisque
temperatures an average
potter would use.
Related Information
Here is how vigorously a deflocculated ceramic slurry should be mixed
Your browser does not support MP4 video.
A video of the kind of agitation needed from a
propeller mixer
to get the best properties out of a
deflocculated
slurry
. This is
Plainsman
Polar Ice
mixing in a 5-gallon pail. Although it is quite plastic compared to industrial casting slips, it has a
specific gravity
of 1.76, is very fluid and casts well in the hands of a potter. These properties are a product of, not just the recipe, but the mixer and its ability to put high energy into the slurry.
Links
Articles
Understanding the Deflocculation Process in Slip Casting
Understanding the magic of
deflocculation
and how to measure
specific gravity
and
viscosity
, and how to interpret the results of these tests to adjust the slip, these are the key to controlling a casting process.
Articles
Understanding the Terra Cotta Slip Casting Recipes In North America
This article helps you understand a good recipe for a red
casting body
so that you will have control and adjustability.
Articles
Formulating a Porcelain
The principles behind formulating a
porcelain
are quite simple. You just need to know the purpose of each material, a starting recipe and a testing regimen.
Glossary
Deflocculation
Deflocculation
is the magic behind the ceramic casting process, it enables slurries having impossibly low water contents and ware having amazingly low drying shrinkage
Glossary
Glaze Chemistry
Glaze chemistry
is the study of how the oxide
chemistry
of glazes relate to the way they fire. It accounts for color, surface, hardness, texture,
melting temperature
,
thermal expansion
, etc.
Glossary
Stoneware
To potters, stonewares are simply high temperature, non-white bodies fired to sufficient density to make
functional
ware that is strong and durable.
URLs
http://www.bigceramicstore.com/Books/slipmolds.htm
Books on Casting
URLs
http://www.baileypottery.com/books/molds.htm
More books on Casting
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy