Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Articles
A ChatBot gives jaw-dropping glaze recipe advice - Jan 2025
A Low Cost Tester of Glaze Melt Fluidity
A One-speed Lab or Studio Slurry Mixer
A Textbook Cone 6 Matte Glaze With Problems
Adjusting Glaze Expansion by Calculation to Solve Shivering
Alberta Slip, 20 Years of Substitution for Albany Slip
An Overview of Ceramic Stains
Are You in Control of Your Production Process?
Are Your Glazes Food Safe or are They Leachable?
Attack on Glass: Corrosion Attack Mechanisms
Ball Milling Glazes, Bodies, Engobes
Binders for Ceramic Bodies
Bringing Out the Big Guns in Craze Control: MgO (G1215U)
Can We Help You Fix a Specific Problem?
Ceramic Glazes Today
Ceramic Material Nomenclature
Ceramic Tile Clay Body Formulation
Changing Our View of Glazes
Chemistry vs. Matrix Blending to Create Glazes from Native Materials
Concentrate on One Good Glaze
Copper Red Glazes
Crazing and Bacteria: Is There a Hazard?
Crazing in Stoneware Glazes: Treating the Causes, Not the Symptoms
Creating a Non-Glaze Ceramic Slip or Engobe
Creating Your Own Budget Glaze
Crystal Glazes: Understanding the Process and Materials
Deflocculants: A Detailed Overview
Demonstrating Glaze Fit Issues to Students
Diagnosing a Casting Problem at a Sanitaryware Plant
Drying Ceramics Without Cracks
Duplicating Albany Slip
Duplicating AP Green Fireclay
Electric Hobby Kilns: What You Need to Know
Fighting the Glaze Dragon
Firing Clay Test Bars
Firing: What Happens to Ceramic Ware in a Firing Kiln
First You See It Then You Don't: Raku Glaze Stability
Fixing a glaze that does not stay in suspension
Formulating a body using clays native to your area
Formulating a Clear Glaze Compatible with Chrome-Tin Stains
Formulating a Porcelain
Formulating Ash and Native-Material Glazes
G1214M Cone 5-7 20x5 glossy transparent glaze
G1214W Cone 6 transparent glaze
G1214Z Cone 6 matte glaze
G1916M Cone 06-04 transparent glaze
Getting the Glaze Color You Want: Working With Stains
Glaze and Body Pigments and Stains in the Ceramic Tile Industry
Glaze Chemistry Basics - Formula, Analysis, Mole%, Unity
Glaze chemistry using a frit of approximate analysis
Glaze Recipes: Formulate and Make Your Own Instead
Glaze Types, Formulation and Application in the Tile Industry
Having Your Glaze Tested for Toxic Metal Release
High Gloss Glazes
Hire Us for a 3D Printing Project
How a Material Chemical Analysis is Done
How desktop INSIGHT Deals With Unity, LOI and Formula Weight
How to Find and Test Your Own Native Clays
I have always done it this way!
Inkjet Decoration of Ceramic Tiles
Is Your Fired Ware Safe?
Leaching Cone 6 Glaze Case Study
Limit Formulas and Target Formulas
Low Budget Testing of Ceramic Glazes
Make Your Own Ball Mill Stand
Making Glaze Testing Cones
Monoporosa or Single Fired Wall Tiles
Organic Matter in Clays: Detailed Overview
Outdoor Weather Resistant Ceramics
Painting Glazes Rather Than Dipping or Spraying
Particle Size Distribution of Ceramic Powders
Porcelain Tile, Vitrified Tile
Rationalizing Conflicting Opinions About Plasticity
Ravenscrag Slip is Born
Recylcing Scrap Clay
Reducing the Firing Temperature of a Glaze From Cone 10 to 6
Setting up a Clay Testing Program in Your Company or Studio
Simple Physical Testing of Clays
Single Fire Glazing
Soluble Salts in Minerals: Detailed Overview
Some Keys to Dealing With Firing Cracks
Stoneware Casting Body Recipes
Substituting Cornwall Stone
Super-Refined Terra Sigillata
The Chemistry, Physics and Manufacturing of Glaze Frits
The Effect of Glaze Fit on Fired Ware Strength
The Four Levels on Which to View Ceramic Glazes
The Majolica Earthenware Process
The Potter's Prayer
The Right Chemistry for a Cone 6 Magnesia Matte
The Trials of Being the Only Technical Person in the Club
The Whining Stops Here: A Realistic Look at Clay Bodies
Those Unlabelled Bags and Buckets
Tiles and Mosaics for Potters
Toxicity of Firebricks Used in Ovens
Trafficking in Glaze Recipes
Understanding Ceramic Materials
Understanding Ceramic Oxides
Understanding Glaze Slurry Properties
Understanding the Deflocculation Process in Slip Casting
Understanding the Terra Cotta Slip Casting Recipes In North America
Understanding Thermal Expansion in Ceramic Glazes
Unwanted Crystallization in a Cone 6 Glaze
Using Dextrin, Glycerine and CMC Gum together
Volcanic Ash
What Determines a Glaze's Firing Temperature?
What is a Mole, Checking Out the Mole
What is the Glaze Dragon?
Where do I start in understanding glazes?
Why Textbook Glazes Are So Difficult
Working with children
Super-Refined Terra Sigillata
Description
Vince Pitelka describes his method of preparing a Terra Sigillata slip.
Article
Traditionally, the primary objective of
terra sigillata
coatings is to get a high satin gloss without a glaze, using simple, 
time-effective polishing methods. Most of the popular published terra sigillata 
recipes do not separate the large particles adequately, and the product is not a 
true terra sig. About 18 years ago, I started researching terra sigillatas in 
conjunction with my "Ancient Clay" classes and workshops at U-Mass-Amherst. 
First experiments were derived from standard recipes in
ceramics
books and 
magazines, and the results were unsatisfactory. I wanted to achieve what I had 
seen on ancient Roman pottery.
Super-refined polishing slips were first used in the Middle 
East at least 1000 BC, and reached a pinnacle of aesthetics and technical 
accomplishment with the terra sigillatas used on Greek and Roman pottery. Like 
so many innovations of the Romans, the technology was lost in the early medieval 
era. 1400 years later, 19
th
century German ceramic chemist Henrich 
Schumann was seeking for low-cost coatings for sanitary sewer pipe. That 
doesn't sound very romantic, but it drove him to make the critical rediscovery. 
Schumann was fascinated by the surfaces on Roman pottery, and conducted cross 
section analysis of the shards. He determined that terra sig is a very thin 
coating of refined slip composed of only the very finest clay platelets. 
Through subsequent experimentation, he was able to reproduced high quality terra 
sig surfaces. Schumann's findings guided me, and experiments conducted with 
students Heather Shadron and Rob Williamson at University of 
Massachusetts-Amherst helped to refine the specific techniques outlined below.
Get an Appropriate Hydrometer
An appropriate hydrometer that measures
specific 
gravity
is required for this technique. A winemaker's hydrometer will 
not work, because it measures fluids lighter than water. Glaze hydrometers that 
measures
specific gravity
will work, but they generally have a scale reading 
from 1.00 (the weight of water) to 2.00, which does not offer much precision in 
the range needed for terra sig. Online laboratory supply sites offer 
appropriate hydrometers that measure specific gravity from 1.00 to 1.20, which 
is the ideal range for terra sig. Go to
www.sargentwelch.com
and enter WLS-42035-A in the search box to find a good 
hydrometer for this application. Note that hydrometers are extremely fragile. 
Get at least two.
Selecting the Clay
You can make terra sig from almost any raw clay or mixed 
claybody, but the yield will depend on the average particle size. Finely 
divided air-floated clays such as
Redart
or Goldart and most ball clays will 
give a high yield of sig. Coarser clays like
kaolin
and
fireclay
give less sig 
and a greater amount of
settled
coarse residue. Don't bother trying to make a 
sig from
bentonite
- it is too fine already, and doesn't yield a good sig. 
Selection of the clay will usually depend on the desired color and firing 
temperature. See the section on "Firing Ranges and Natural Clay Colors Achieved 
with Terra Sig" for more information.
Some clays are so coarse as to give a very low yield of 
sig. If you choose a particular clay for compelling reasons, and the yield of 
terra sig is especially low, the raw clay can be
ball-milled
before 
incorporating in to the initial mixture. See the section on "Adding Coloring
Oxides
and Ceramic
Stains
" for more information on ball-milling.
Preparing the Deflocculant
The secret of refining a proper terra sigillata is to 
settle out all but the very finest particles. A
deflocculant
is a 
chemical additive that causes particles in aqueous
suspension
to repel one 
another, and it is a critical part of the terra sig process. Only a tiny amount 
of deflocculant is needed, and adding additional is counterproductive, so be 
very careful with your math and your measuring.
Soda ash
(sodium 
carbonate) and
sodium silicate
both work as deflocculants, but for 
reasons that no one seems to understand, a combination of the two work best in 
terra sig.
The amount of deflocculant is figured as a percentage of 
the dry weight of clay to be used. To a small amount of hot water, add 0.25% 
(1/4 of 1%) soda ash (sodium carbonate)
and
0.25% sodium 
silicate. A hand blender will make short work of dissolving the chemicals. The
sodium silicate
comes as a liquid, but just measure the weight as if it were a 
solid.
Measuring Specific Gravity with a Hydrometer
To measure specific gravity with a hydrometer, the liquid 
must be in a container tall enough to float the hydrometer. If your mixing 
container is not tall enough, pour some of the liquid into a tall thin 
container. The most practical container for this application is a laboratory 
graduated cylinder. Go to an online laboratory supply site and purchase a 
plastic 250 ml. graduated cylinder. Lower the heavy end of the hydrometer 
carefully into the liquid until it floats on its own, and read the scale exactly 
where the hydrometer tube meets the surface of the liquid.
Immediately before measuring the specific gravity with a 
hydrometer, always be sure to mix your terra sigillata thoroughly with a hand 
blender or drill-mounted impeller mixer. The sig will settle, especially in the 
initial mixture, and you must make sure that all particles are in suspension in 
order to get an accurate hydrometer reading.
Determining the Initial Mixture
For the time and trouble involved, and considering the low 
cost of raw clay, it is best to make a quantity of sig all at once. I never 
make less than five gallons of initial mixture. After
settling
, siphoning, and 
concentrating, that will yield about a half gallon of super-refined terra sig. 
A near-full five-gallon bucket of initial mixture will take about 14 lbs. of 
Redart, Goldart, kaolin, fire clay, or any dry claybody, or about 11 lbs. of
ball clay
.
Add the dissolved deflocculant mix to cold water, starting 
with a quart of cold water for every two pounds of dry clay to be used. Add the 
dry clay, blending with a drill-mounted impeller mixer. When all the dry clay 
is mixed in, add more cold water, mixing well, and check frequently with the 
hydrometer until the specific gravity reading is 1.20 for any clays except ball 
clays, or 1.15 for ball clays. If you are mixing in a full five-gallon bucket, 
float the hydrometer right in the bucket. If mixing smaller quantities, you 
will need a graduated cylinder or other appropriate container as mentioned 
above.
Settling the Initial Mixture
As soon as you have finished blending the initial mixture, 
note the time, and
place the container on a raised table or shelf and leave 
it undisturbed for 20 hours
. It must be in a location where you can siphon 
from it, and it will be a great advantage to have the bottom of the container at 
least two to three feet above the floor.
Don't be careless about this. Do not move or agitate the 
container in any way during the 20-hour settling time, or during the siphoning 
process outlined below. If you agitate the mix, you ruin the terra sig. 
Consistency in method and timing is critically important in making good terra 
sig. If you accidentally agitate the mixture, or if you let the mixture stand 
for longer than 20 hours, thoroughly mix it again with a drill-mounted impeller 
mixer, note the time, and start the 20 hours settling period again.
Why 20 Hours?
The 20-hour settling time may seem arbitrary, but it's not. 
I am grateful to student Rob Williamson at U-Mass for helping to determine the 
ideal settling time. There are several forces at work in this
deflocculated
mix. The deflocculant introduces same electrical charges to particles in aqueous 
suspension, causing them to repel one another and stay in suspension longer. 
Also, there is ever-present atomic vibration which causes particles in liquids 
to naturally disperse. Working against these forces is gravity, causing 
particles to settle out. At 20 hours, in a deflocculated slip of the correct 
specific gravity, gravity has caused all the heavier particles to settle out, 
while atomic vibration and the repelling forces caused by
deflocculation
keep 
the finest particles (generally those less than one micron - 1/1000 of a mm) in 
suspension.
Decanting the Terra Sig: Get a Proper Racking Tube
The essential tool for decanting the dilute terra sig is a 
winemaker's siphon, referred to in the winemaking industry as a
racking 
tube
or
racking cane
. You can get one from any supplier 
of winemaking equipment, including many online sources. Note that in some cases 
the racking tube comes with attached flexible tubing, while in other cases the 
tubing must be ordered separately.
An appropriate racking tube features a "J"-shaped rigid 
plastic tube attached to a length of flexible plastic tubing. An important 
feature of a good racking tube is the
diversion cap
on the suction 
end of the rigid tube. This allows fluid to enter above the cap rather than 
below, and offers real advantages in siphoning terra sig. As you gently probe 
downwards with the rigid tube, the objective is to sense the increased density 
of heavier sediments before the siphon starts to pick up those sediments, thus 
avoiding contaminating the terra sig. The diversion cap makes this much more 
feasible.
Siphoning off the Dilute Terra Sig
The upper part of the mix is now a very dilute terra 
sigillata, and must be carefully siphoned off, avoiding the heavier sediments 
lower down in the container. This is a touchy process and must be done properly 
with the right equipment. While siphoning, do not discard any liquid at the 
top. Some clays will give a seemingly transparent layer of water at the top, 
but this layer contains some of the very finest particles. Siphon off the 
transparent layer (if any) and keep siphoning until you come to heaver sediments 
in the lower portion of the container.
Start the siphon with the diversion cap just barely 
immersed in the settled mix.
As mentioned above, do not agitate this 
container or the settled mix at all.
Once the siphoning is started, gently 
lower the tip of the siphon tube into the mixture as the thin liquid is siphoned 
off, keeping the diversion tip just below the surface. The diversion cap will 
occasionally suck a bit of air, but that hurts nothing, and tells you that the 
tip is close to the surface. If it sucks too much air the siphoning action will 
cease, and you'll have to restart it. You will quickly get a feeling for this.
With some clays such as Redart, the heavier sediments will 
form a distinct layer with a fairly hard surface, and you will feel that layer 
with the tip of the diversion cap. As soon as this happens, lift the siphon 
tube and stop siphoning immediately. Don't risk picking up any of the heavier 
sediments.
With some clays, you will never feel a distinctly heavier 
layer. In that case, let the suction tube suck a little air every few seconds, 
and note the change when the siphon naturally begins to suck more air, 
indicating that the mixture is getting thicker. Once again, as soon as this 
happens, lift the siphon tube and stop siphoning immediately.
With most ball clays, the particle size is so consistent 
that you never will sense a heavier layer of sediment at all. In that case, 
just siphon off the top two thirds of the mixture and discard the rest, and you 
will get a good terra sig. That may seem inexact, but there doesn't seem to be 
any other choice, and that bottom third seems to accommodate the heavier 
particles. As instructed above, in making ball clay terra sig you should start 
with a thinner 1.15 specific gravity initial mixture, and that helps to allow 
the coarsest fraction of particles to settle out, so even if you are not able to 
identify thicker sediments in the lower portion of the vessel, you can be sure 
they are there. Don't try to siphon off more than two thirds. It just isn't 
worth risking contaminating the sig.
With most clays, the residue of heavier sediment left in 
the bottom of the container represents most of the weight of what you started 
out with, but I have never tried to do anything with that residue. Raw clay is 
cheap, while terra sig is very valuable based on your time invested. The 
residue already has the finest particles removed, and thus is relatively 
non-plastic. I just discard it, but you may find a good use for it.
Concentrating the Thin Sig by Evaporation
Since the initial mixture is either 1.20 or 1.15 specific 
gravity, and most of the heavy particles are settled out and discarded, the 
siphoned mixture will be extremely thin and relatively unusable. The next 
challenge is to concentrate the sig by evaporating water. This can be done by 
natural evaporation in any wide, low container will work, such as one of those 
broad dish-shaped plastic
snow
sleds, an automotive oil-change pan, or a very 
large round or rectangular cake pan. Protect the concentrating sig from 
contamination by large particles, but don't put a cloth over it, because that 
will severely retard evaporation. Don't worry about bugs or the very fine 
particles of dust that float in the air. Those particles won't hurt the sig, 
and the bugs can be skimmed off.
Concentrating the Thin Sig by Heat
You can concentrate terra sig with heat, but don't do it on 
direct heat, like a stove burner or hotplate. The sig will solidify directly on 
the bottom of the pot, and the metal will burn. I concentrate terra sig in a 
large metal mixing bowl, placed carefully-centered on the bottom shelf of a 
toploader kiln, and I leave the bottom element on low overnight. It may be 
easier to place the empty bowl on the bottom shelf and then carefully fill it 
with a measuring cup, being very cautious to avoid splattering sig on the 
heating elements. In either case, turn off the circuit breaker feeding the kiln 
while you place or remove the metal container.
As another option, use a crock pot set on medium heat with 
the lid off. In either case, the rate of drying will depend on the atmospheric 
humidity and the mount of heat applied. It will take some experimentation to 
learn the ideal conditions.
Using the Sig As Soon As It Has Concentrated
If you are in a rush to use the sig, watch it carefully, 
and when it has thickened considerably, scrape the thick accumulation loose and 
mix back into suspension with a whisk. Add water to adjust the specific gravity 
as indicated below.
Storing the Sig in Dry Form
If you don't need the sig right away, let it dry 
completely, scrape it loose from the container, and store it until needed. 
Drying doesn't hurt the sig in any way. 24 hours before you need to use the 
sig, place an appropriate amount in a container, cover with water one inch above 
the sig, let it sit overnight, and then add more water, checking the consistency 
with the hydrometer to get the desired specific gravity. If you are mixing a 
small quantity, a hand blender helps. For larger amounts use a drill-mounted 
impeller mixer to blend the sig.
Determining the Specific Gravity for Application
A terra sig must be mixed very thinly to work properly, but 
beyond that there are no hard and fast rules for the ideal consistency of sig 
for application. The thicker the sig, the less water introduced into the 
claybody, but the greater chance that the sig layer will crack and peel. The 
thinner the sig, the less chance it will crack and peel, but the more coats you 
will need, and thus the more water introduced into the claybody, risking cracks 
in the ware. For most sigs and most application methods, I have had best luck 
with a specific gravity of 1.15, and would not recommend using sig mixed thicker 
than that. This material simply does not respond well to thicker applications, 
and it will encourage cracking and
peeling
, either during drying, firing, or 
subsequent use. Instead, you will get the best results with multiple thin 
layers of terra sig.
When and How to Apply the Terra Sig
Some people recommend applying sig to
leather-hard
clay, 
but in my experience that is a waste of time unless you just want only the 
natural soft satin sheen sig can give without polishing or burnishing. The sig 
layer is pretty dense, more so if it has been polished. It doesn't have much 
capacity for shrinkage, and none at all if it has been burnished. Even 
hard-leather-hard clay will shrink as it dries, and the sig coating will crinkle 
on a microscopic level, diminishing or ruining any shine that is present.
I apply terra sig to bone dry clay, and get the best 
adhesion when the clay has been sanded. Since most of my terra sig use is in 
conjunction with the Ancient Clay workshops I teach, the pieces are usually 
sanded, as is the tradition among Southwestern Native Americans and many other 
cultures past and present that polish or burnish their wares. I sand with 
120-grit drywall sanding mesh, available from any good building materials 
center.
If you sand the wares, be sure to thoroughly wipe down all 
surfaces with a soft cloth such as tee-shirt material in order to remove all 
dust. If you neglect to do this, the paintbrush will carry the dust back to 
your sig container, contaminating the sig.
I apply terra sig with a wide, thick soft brush heavily 
loaded with sig, laying on flowing strokes, carefully avoiding drips. If the 
sig does drip down the surface, chase the drips with your brush. Don't let the 
drips harden on the surface, and don't let the piece sit in sig pooled at the 
base. I work my way around the piece, building up thin coats until I get an 
opaque surface that begins to conceal the sanded texture. That's still a very 
thin coat overall, but if you accumulate much more thickness, you are risking 
subsequent cracking and peeling of the sig coat.
If you wish to preserve some of the color and the surface 
texture of the base surface, you can get a good shine with an almost transparent 
coat, because the shine results from the ultra-fine clay platelets laying flat 
on the surface. Ultimately, it's a matter of experience with your particular 
terra sig and base claybody. Experiment with the thinnest buildup possible, and 
see if it meets your needs. Build up from there to see what you can get away 
with.
Polishing and/or Burnishing the Sig Surface
As soon as I achieve the desired sig buildup, and the 
wetness has soaked in, I polish the surface with a piece of grocery bag plastic 
stretched over my fingertips. The first time you do this, you won't believe 
what happens. It is magical. Grocery bag plastic is harder and denser than 
other plastic bag material, and gives a better shine. Some people prefer to 
polish with soft flannel or tee-shirt material or a soft brush, but I have had 
best success with the grocery bag plastic. I get a glassy shine in one polish.
There's no reason to polish between coats. When you do 
polish, if you are not satisfied with the shine, you can simply paint on more 
terra sig. The new coat disrupts the previous shine, achieving a good bond.
It is important to clarify the terminology of polishing and 
burnishing.
Polishing
refers to any means of achieving a shine. 
In this case,
burnishing
is a kind of polishing, but specifically 
refers to rubbing the surface with a hard, unyielding object, like a shiny stone 
or the back of a metal spoon. The potters in one Central American village 
burnish with the curved plastic cap from a particular brand of shoe polish.
It is possible to burnish any re-moistened bone-dry clay 
surface, but usually some sort of refined slip is applied to the base clay. A 
properly prepared terra sig makes an excellent burnishing slip, but if you rely 
entirely on the moisture introduced by the sig, burnishing must be completed in 
one sitting while the coating is still damp. Otherwise the surface will begin 
to flake and crack. To prevent this, especially with larger forms, many potters 
apply the sig, allow the water to absorb, apply a thin smear-coat of lard or 
glycerin, and let that absorb before burnishing. The grease retards drying, 
giving you time to finish burnishing the piece.
Even though terra sig makes a good burnishing slip, it is 
not the ideal use of this medium. The whole point of this elaborate preparation 
process is to produce a thin slip medium that polishes beautifully and gives the 
unique terra sig shine, but doesn't involve the labor-intensity of burnishing. 
After proper application of terra sigillata, the actual polishing process on a 
medium-sized pot using grocery bag plastic takes ten or fifteen minutes. A 
thorough burnishing job on the same pot takes at least two or three hours.
Firing Ranges and Natural Clay Colors Achieved with 
Terra Sig
A true burnished surface cannot be fired above cone 012. 
Beyond that, as described earlier, the compressed surface crinkles on a 
microscopic level, and you loose your shine. On the other hand, highly polished 
(not burnished) terra sig surfaces can be fired as high as cone 02 with the 
polish intact. At higher temperatures, terra sigs will give an appealing satin 
finish, but the high shine will disappear.
I have applied very thin coats of terra sig to bisqueware 
with adequate results, but it never produces the level of shine or
durability
of 
surface achieved with a sig applied to bone dry clay. Terra sig applied too 
thickly on bisqueware will almost always crack and peel.
At cone 012, Redart sig gives a bright brick-red-orange 
color. At cone 08 it gives a classic brick red, and cone 02 it gives a red 
brown. At midrange and highfire temperatures, a Redart (or other
earthenware
clay) terra sig will fuse and become a glaze.
At lowfire temperatures Goldart and other
stoneware
clays 
and most fire clays give an off-white color at low temperatures, and at 
high-fire will produce a tan in oxidation and gray in reduction. Ball clays 
generally give white at lowfire temperatures, and an off-white or gray at 
high-fire. Most kaolins produce white at all temperatures. Red stoneware clays 
like Carbondale, Lizella, or Neuman red often tend to be quite coarse, but can 
still give a good brick-red terra sig that will survive to high-fire 
temperatures without fusing into a glaze. Some red stoneware clays may need to 
be ball-milled before incorporation into the initial mixture.
A properly-made Redart sig produces a very dense coating, 
and in a blackware bonfiring gives a range of colors from brick red to 
jet-black, and any re-oxidized spots will go back to brick red. Ball clay terra 
sig is slightly more porous, and in a blackware bonfiring can give intense 
jet-black, and any re-oxidized spots will go to gray or white.
Using Terra Sig to Coat Feet and Lid Seats
From a philosophical point of view, I like to see and feel 
the unglazed clay on the foot of a vessel, and I like the feel of a snug-fitting 
clay-to-clay lid seat. I find no advantage in a glazed foot, especially on 
midrange and high-fired ware. I do not care for the brittle, fragile feel and 
fit of a glazed lid seat, and again, I see no advantage in it. However, some 
claybodies high in
grog
can give unpleasantly rough surfaces on the exposed clay 
of a foot or lid seat, and you would certainly be justified in wanting a 
smoother surface. A good solution is to coat those parts with terra sig made 
from the base claybody. That way, you still have the visual and tactile 
contrast of unglazed clay on the foot or lid seat, but it will be relatively 
smooth to the touch.
Slake down scrap claybody clay overnight in ample water and 
mix with a drill-mounted impeller mixer, adding more water to achieve the 1.2 
specific gravity initial mixture. Don't worry about sand or grog, because those 
will be the first components to settle out in the initial mix.
If you do not use the base claybody, select a clay 
appropriate to the base claybody and the intended firing temperature. Remember, 
an earthenware clay slip will become a glaze at midrange and high-fire 
temperatures. Terra sigs made from stoneware clays like Goldart or from a ball 
clay or kaolin will work fine up to high-fire temperatures, and even then will 
still give a silky smooth surface.
Adding Coloring Oxides or Ceramic Stains
I always work with pure clay terra sigs, because they give 
the best shine. Colored sigs are an appealing option, but some oxides and all 
commercial ceramic stains are coarsely ground, and will diminish the potential 
for polishing the sig. Very finely divided oxides like
copper carbonate
or 
cobalt carbonate can be added in small quantities without significant loss of 
shine. To use other oxides, or to use ceramic stains, you will need to 
ball-mill the mix. A commercially-made
ball mill
is a very expensive piece of 
equipment, but you can make do with a large rock tumbler. Fill the reservoir 
one third with quartz pebbles or glass marbles, and one third with 
thick-creamy-consistency terra sig with the oxides or stains added, leaving one 
third air space. Do not overfill the reservoir or the materials will not tumble 
properly. Ball mill for at least 24 hours, thin to desired consistency, and 
test it. If the
colorants
settle out, or if it does not develop a good shine, 
it needs to be
ball milled
longer. This will require experimentation on your 
part, because it is outside my own area of experience.
A well-prepared terra sigillata is truly a remarkable 
medium. It has become a popular option in contemporary ceramics throughout the 
US, Canada, Europe, Australia, and New Zealand. Polished terra sig finishes 
have become especially popular in pit-firing, bonfiring, sagger, 
sawdust-smoking,
raku
, and horsehair effects. Whatever you do with terra sig, 
you are part of a 4000-year tradition that continues to evolve. If you 
discovery interesting new effects or uses in your experiments, I'd love to hear 
about them. You can email me at my home page at http://iweb.tntech.edu/wpitelka.
Related Information
Links
URLs
http://iweb.tntech.edu/wpitelka
Home Page
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By Vince PITELKA
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy