Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Articles
A ChatBot gives jaw-dropping glaze recipe advice - Jan 2025
A Low Cost Tester of Glaze Melt Fluidity
A One-speed Lab or Studio Slurry Mixer
A Textbook Cone 6 Matte Glaze With Problems
Adjusting Glaze Expansion by Calculation to Solve Shivering
Alberta Slip, 20 Years of Substitution for Albany Slip
An Overview of Ceramic Stains
Are You in Control of Your Production Process?
Are Your Glazes Food Safe or are They Leachable?
Attack on Glass: Corrosion Attack Mechanisms
Ball Milling Glazes, Bodies, Engobes
Binders for Ceramic Bodies
Bringing Out the Big Guns in Craze Control: MgO (G1215U)
Can We Help You Fix a Specific Problem?
Ceramic Glazes Today
Ceramic Material Nomenclature
Ceramic Tile Clay Body Formulation
Changing Our View of Glazes
Chemistry vs. Matrix Blending to Create Glazes from Native Materials
Concentrate on One Good Glaze
Copper Red Glazes
Crazing and Bacteria: Is There a Hazard?
Crazing in Stoneware Glazes: Treating the Causes, Not the Symptoms
Creating a Non-Glaze Ceramic Slip or Engobe
Creating Your Own Budget Glaze
Crystal Glazes: Understanding the Process and Materials
Deflocculants: A Detailed Overview
Demonstrating Glaze Fit Issues to Students
Diagnosing a Casting Problem at a Sanitaryware Plant
Drying Ceramics Without Cracks
Duplicating Albany Slip
Duplicating AP Green Fireclay
Electric Hobby Kilns: What You Need to Know
Fighting the Glaze Dragon
Firing Clay Test Bars
Firing: What Happens to Ceramic Ware in a Firing Kiln
First You See It Then You Don't: Raku Glaze Stability
Fixing a glaze that does not stay in suspension
Formulating a body using clays native to your area
Formulating a Clear Glaze Compatible with Chrome-Tin Stains
Formulating a Porcelain
Formulating Ash and Native-Material Glazes
G1214M Cone 5-7 20x5 glossy transparent glaze
G1214W Cone 6 transparent glaze
G1214Z Cone 6 matte glaze
G1916M Cone 06-04 transparent glaze
Getting the Glaze Color You Want: Working With Stains
Glaze and Body Pigments and Stains in the Ceramic Tile Industry
Glaze Chemistry Basics - Formula, Analysis, Mole%, Unity
Glaze chemistry using a frit of approximate analysis
Glaze Recipes: Formulate and Make Your Own Instead
Glaze Types, Formulation and Application in the Tile Industry
Having Your Glaze Tested for Toxic Metal Release
High Gloss Glazes
Hire Us for a 3D Printing Project
How a Material Chemical Analysis is Done
How desktop INSIGHT Deals With Unity, LOI and Formula Weight
How to Find and Test Your Own Native Clays
I have always done it this way!
Inkjet Decoration of Ceramic Tiles
Is Your Fired Ware Safe?
Leaching Cone 6 Glaze Case Study
Limit Formulas and Target Formulas
Low Budget Testing of Ceramic Glazes
Make Your Own Ball Mill Stand
Making Glaze Testing Cones
Monoporosa or Single Fired Wall Tiles
Organic Matter in Clays: Detailed Overview
Outdoor Weather Resistant Ceramics
Painting Glazes Rather Than Dipping or Spraying
Particle Size Distribution of Ceramic Powders
Porcelain Tile, Vitrified Tile
Rationalizing Conflicting Opinions About Plasticity
Ravenscrag Slip is Born
Recylcing Scrap Clay
Reducing the Firing Temperature of a Glaze From Cone 10 to 6
Setting up a Clay Testing Program in Your Company or Studio
Simple Physical Testing of Clays
Single Fire Glazing
Soluble Salts in Minerals: Detailed Overview
Some Keys to Dealing With Firing Cracks
Stoneware Casting Body Recipes
Substituting Cornwall Stone
Super-Refined Terra Sigillata
The Chemistry, Physics and Manufacturing of Glaze Frits
The Effect of Glaze Fit on Fired Ware Strength
The Four Levels on Which to View Ceramic Glazes
The Majolica Earthenware Process
The Potter's Prayer
The Right Chemistry for a Cone 6 Magnesia Matte
The Trials of Being the Only Technical Person in the Club
The Whining Stops Here: A Realistic Look at Clay Bodies
Those Unlabelled Bags and Buckets
Tiles and Mosaics for Potters
Toxicity of Firebricks Used in Ovens
Trafficking in Glaze Recipes
Understanding Ceramic Materials
Understanding Ceramic Oxides
Understanding Glaze Slurry Properties
Understanding the Deflocculation Process in Slip Casting
Understanding the Terra Cotta Slip Casting Recipes In North America
Understanding Thermal Expansion in Ceramic Glazes
Unwanted Crystallization in a Cone 6 Glaze
Using Dextrin, Glycerine and CMC Gum together
Volcanic Ash
What Determines a Glaze's Firing Temperature?
What is a Mole, Checking Out the Mole
What is the Glaze Dragon?
Where do I start in understanding glazes?
Why Textbook Glazes Are So Difficult
Working with children
Organic Matter in Clays: Detailed Overview
Description
A detailed look at what materials contain organics, what its effects are in firing (e.g. black core), what to do to deal with the problem and how to measure the amount of organics in a clay material.
By Nilo Tozzi
Article
Clays always contain organic material of various types and origins. In clays dating from more recent eras we can find
lignin
and humic acids, in colloidal form and with notable ionic exchange properties due to the
functional
groups -CH e –COOH present in their molecules. In clays of older eras, carbonaceous and bituminous substances are more frequent, with few functional groups capable of influencing colloidal and ionic exchange properties. Generally the calcareous material is found in the form of lignite, in grains of variable dimensions that form
agglomerates
or layers, or in the form of colloidal particles clinging to the crystals of argillaceous material. In so-called “ball clays” the material in colloidal form can also be composed of humic acids which facilitate the
deflocculation
process.
Combustion of organic substances occurs between 300 and 600°C and they
decompose
entirely if the quantity of oxygen is sufficient for complete reaction development.
During the firing process of ceramic parts, the organic substances present in the clays can cause the development of a central area (in the ceramic object) of a different color, varying from black to yellow. This is known as the “black core”. This phenomenon is due to the thermal
decomposition
of the organic material and to oxidation-reduction reactions of the inorganic components.
(1)(2)
.
Basically, whenever the quantity of organic substances is higher than a certain value or whenever low
permeability
of the ceramic object does not permit complete combustion due to lack of oxygen, carbon remains in the center of the matrix up to higher temperatures (where these can cause reduction of the iron). The size of the
black core
depends on various factors, such as temperature and firing cycle,
forming method
,
porosity
of the ceramic object and oven atmosphere
(3)(4)
.
The black core has no effect on the appearance of enameled objects if it does not cause bubbles or craters. In fact, it increases the mechanic strength in that it creates a greater
vitrified
cross section in the ceramic object. However, in the case of enameled tiles or
porcelain
tiles, the black core, despite not damaging the enamel, can cause warpage (and quality reduction in the final product). In the case of pressed floor tiles or those fired with rapid cycles, the phenomenon can prove particularly damaging to enamels, and various methods are used in order to reduce or eliminate it:
Increase of the percentage of non-plastic materials in the composition.
Addition of oxidants (
MnO2
or nitrates).
Increase of grinding residue.
Reduction of residual humidity.
Reduction of pressing force.
Modification of the firing curve so as to increase time spent in the interval 250 – 600°C.
Render oven atmosphere as oxidizing as possible.
The content of organic carbon in clays for
ceramics
can be identified and this is particularly important if the transformations that take place in these substances during the production cycle are to be studied, as well as their influence on the properties of intermediate and finished products.
Normally the values found are in the following range:
Light firing clays 0.1 - 0.5 %
Red firing clays 0.1 - 1.0 %
Ball clays 0.1 - 3.5 %
The analytical techniques most commonly used in the ceramics sector for quantitative
determination of organic fractions are the following (see also description below):
Walkley – Peech method (chemical oxidation).
Tidy method (1)
Infrared absorption and thermogravimetric analysis method (IRA/TG).
Simultaneous thermal analysis method (TG7DTA).
Organic substances in some argillaceous materials according to
three different analytical methods
(5)
Walkley Peech
IRA/TG
TG (air)
Material
Origin
C%
C%
Weight loss %
Kaolin
Provins (France)
0.40
0.40
0.60
Kaolin
Cornwall (U.K.)
<0.10
0.13
<0.2
China clay
S. Severa (Rome, Italy)
0.12
0.10
<0.2
Illite -
kaolin
clay
Gattinara (Vc, Italy)
0.10
0.12
0.4
Illite - kaolin clay
Escalaplano (Cagliari, Italy)
1.04
0.95
0.9
Clay
Westerwald (Germany)
0.10
0.15
<0.2
Clay
Westerwald (Germany)
0.30
0.14
<0.2
Ball clay
Devon (U.K.)
2.98
2.93
3.2
Ball clay
Devon (U.K.)
2.10
1.95
2.4
Illite - kaolin clay
Monte S. Pietro (Bo, Italy)
0.25
0.12
<0.2
Calcareous clay
Codrignano (Ra, Italy)
0.70
1.70
0.6
Bibliography
(1) E. W. Worrall, C. V. Green, The Organic matter in Ball Clays, Trans Brit. Cer. Soc. 52 p.58).
(2) A. Barba, A. Moreno, F. Negre, A. B,asco, Oxidation of black cores in firing, Tile and Brick Int. 6
(1990) p. 17.
(3) X. Elias, The formation and consequences of black core in ceramica ware, Interceram 3 (1980) p. 380.
(4) H. M. M. Diz, B. Rand, I. B. Inwang, The effect of organic matter and electrolyte on the
rheological
behaviour of ball clays, Br. Ceram Trans. 89 (1990) p. 124.
(5) A. Barba, F. Negre, M. J. Ortis, A Escardino, Oxidation of black core during the firing of ceramic ware –3. Influence of the thickness of the piece and the composition of the black core, Br. Ceram. Trans. 91 (1992) p. 36.
(6) M. Raimondo, P. Damasino, M. Dondi, Determinazione quantitativa del carbonio organico nei
materiali argillosi per uso ceramico: un confronto fra tre diversi metodi analitici, Ceramurgia 3
(1999) p. 179.
Walkley-Peech method (chemical oxidation)
This is an analytical procedure which allows for the quantitative evaluation of organic substance content in an argillaceous material via chemical oxidation.
Principle
This method provides the percentage of organic carbon present in the material or the total percentage of organic substances, using a suitable correction factor (1).
The organic substances are oxidized using potassium bichromate in a concentrated sulphuric acid environment (at the temperature necessary for fast dilution of the acid). After a pre-established time, the excess bichromate that has not reacted is identified by dosing with a solution of Fe(2).
Apparatus and reactants
25 ml flask (divisions of 0.05 ml).
Potassium bichromate solution 1,000 N. Dissolve 49,035 g of K
2
Cr
2
O
7
, dried at 105°C, in one litre of distilled water.
Fe(2) solution 0.5 N. Pour 600 ml of distilled water and 15 ml of concentrated sulphuric
acid into a 1 litre flask. Add 200 g of Mohr salt [Fe(NH
4
)
2
(SO
4
)
2
• 6H
2
O] to bring up to 1 liter volume. The title of the solution is not stable (because Fe(2) changes to Fe(3)) and should be examined for each series of analysis.
Sulphuric diphenylamine solution (0.5 g in 50 ml concentrated sulphuric acid).
Procedure
Place a quantity of sample sieved at 150µm in a 500 ml flask.
Quantities:
500 g for samples containing more than 3% of organic substances
1,000 g for samples containing between 1 and 3% of organic substances
2,000 g for samples containing less than 1% of organic substances
The quantity is calculated so as to have at least 3 ml of unreacted bichromate after initial oxidation.
Add 10 ml of the potassium bichromate at 1.0 N. Shake and add 20 ml of concentrated
sulfuric acid, letting it flow down the sides. Shake and leave to settle for 30 minutes. Add 200 ml of distilled water.
At this point one proceeds to dosing of the excess bichromate by adding 5 ml of
phosphoric acid at 60%, 0.5 ml of diphenilamine indicator and finally the Fe(2) solution,
until the color turns from blue to green.
At the same time a blank test is carried out with 10 ml of bichromate, 20 ml of sulphuric
acid and 200 ml of distilled water.
Calculation
Organic carbon % = 10 • (1 – T/S) • (0.39/P)
Where:
P = weight of sample
T = ml of Fe(2) solution used for dosing.
S = ml of Fe(2) solution used for the blank test.
If we presume that each equivalent of carbon is 77% oxidized, then the quantity of oxidated carbon is given by: 10 • (1 – T/S) • (0.003/0.77).
In order to obtain the percentage of organic substances we must multiply the percentage of organic carbon by the empirical factor of 1.72.
Notes
The percentage of organic substances as determined above could be higher than the actual substances present due to interference by reducing
oxides
, such as manganese, and ferrous or chloride compounds.
Generally if manganese oxides are present they exist in very low concentrations. Iron (2) oxide can be oxidized by air exposure during drying whereas the interference of chlorides, which are normally present in quantities less than 0.2%, can be eliminated by adding a few mercury chloride crystals to the flask (before adding reactants).
The detection limit of this method is approx. 0.1% with good consistency (0.05%).
Bibliography
(1) Methods of Soils Analysis (Part 2), Soil Science Society of America, 1982
Infrared absorption and thermogravimetric analysis method (Ira/TG).
Analytical instrument procedure enabling the quantitative evaluation of organic substance content in an argillaceous material. (1).
The quantity of total CO
2
developed from a sample is assessed by subjecting it to a combustion process and measuring the intensity of the infrared absorption bandwidth. The instrument (LECO CS-225) is calibrated (ASTM E 1019) with a reference standard at a known CO
2
value.
The instrument individuates total carbon content, i.e. also that present in carbonates (which must therefore be subtracted from the measurement via individuation through thermogravimetric analysis or calcimetry (2).
Thermogravimetric analysis for the individuation of carbon in carbonates can be carried out in either exposure to air or in a carbon dioxide environment, in order to increase the characteristic temperatures of calcite and
dolomite
decomposition and to reduce interference attributable to deoxydrilation of the argillaceous materials (decomposition reactions are normally in the range 650-800 C but in a
CO2
atmosphere they are pushed to higher temperatures where we don't have any reaction of water elimination from structures of clays).
Individuation is carried out on a sample quantity of 0.1 g and the results are expressed as a percentage on the weight of the sample. The detection limit is less than 0.1% of total C (total carbon in the clay including carbonates) and the consistency of data varies between 0.05 and 0.1% of total °C. With the calcimetric method the detection limits (0.2%) and consistency of the method (0.2 – 0.3%) are increased.
In the case of calcareous clays, it is also necessary to carry out a thermogravimetric test, with consequent uncertainties in the interpretation of the TG curve in order to find the percentage of carbonates, rendering the method slower and less precise than the Walkley-Peech method.
Bibliography
(1) W. Gruner, E. Grallath, Improvements in the combustion method for the determination of low
carbon contents in steel, Steel Research 66 (1995) p. 455.
(2) B. Fabbri, P. Gazzi, G. G. Zuffa, La determinazione della componente carbonatica delle rocce, La Ceramica 3 (1974) p. 13.
Simultaneous thermal analysis method (TG7DTA).
Instrument analytical procedure allowing only for a semi-quantative evaluation of organic substance content in an argillaceous material, as it is less sensitive and accurate that the previous two methods.
Using thermogravimetric analysis, the variations in mass of an argillaceous material are identified as it is subjected to a controlled temperature gradient.
The combustion of organic substances occurs in the interval 200 – 500°C and is associated with an exothermic effect on the DTA curve.
At the same temperature interval, weight loss and endothermic effects occur, due to dehydrating reactions in Fe, Al and Mn hydroxides which may be present.
In order to eliminate interference, thermogravimetric analysis in nitrogen atmosphere can be carried out in order to define weight loss due to deoxydrilation reactions of the previous elements (which is subtracted from total weight loss in the same thermal interval).
The two analyses are carried out with approx. 10 mg of sample at the thermal interval 100 – 500°C with a heat increase of 10°C/min. Detection limits and consistency of this method are influenced by the difficulty in interpreting the TG curves; uncertainty amounts to approx. 0.2 – 0.3% of total organic substance weight.
Through weight loss in air between 100 and 500°C, as shown in the previous table, it is possible only to obtain a semi-quantitative estimation of organic carbon if this is higher than 0.5%.
Remark
According to F. Q. Al Khalissi  e W. E: Worral (Trans. Brit. Ceram. Soc., 8,1982,pag.145) organic substances can be completely removed by treating the ground clay with water oxygenated at 30% vol. and heated for several hours at approx. 80 C.
Related Information
Links
Glossary
LOI
Loss on Ignition is a number that appears on the data sheets of ceramic materials. It refers to the amount of weight the material loses as it decomposes to release water vapor and various gases during firing.
Glossary
Zeta Potential
Glossary
Sulfates
Soluble
sulfates
in clay produce
efflorescence
, an unsightly scum that mars the fired surface of structural and
functional
ceramic products.
Tests
TGA
This test plots a history of weight changes in a material as it is heated in a kiln
Troubles
Black Coring
A common fault in reduction gas fired ceramic ware made from iron bearing clays.  The interior cross section of the clay turns black.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By Nilo Tozzi
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy