Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Articles
A ChatBot gives jaw-dropping glaze recipe advice - Jan 2025
A Low Cost Tester of Glaze Melt Fluidity
A One-speed Lab or Studio Slurry Mixer
A Textbook Cone 6 Matte Glaze With Problems
Adjusting Glaze Expansion by Calculation to Solve Shivering
Alberta Slip, 20 Years of Substitution for Albany Slip
An Overview of Ceramic Stains
Are You in Control of Your Production Process?
Are Your Glazes Food Safe or are They Leachable?
Attack on Glass: Corrosion Attack Mechanisms
Ball Milling Glazes, Bodies, Engobes
Binders for Ceramic Bodies
Bringing Out the Big Guns in Craze Control: MgO (G1215U)
Can We Help You Fix a Specific Problem?
Ceramic Glazes Today
Ceramic Material Nomenclature
Ceramic Tile Clay Body Formulation
Changing Our View of Glazes
Chemistry vs. Matrix Blending to Create Glazes from Native Materials
Concentrate on One Good Glaze
Copper Red Glazes
Crazing and Bacteria: Is There a Hazard?
Crazing in Stoneware Glazes: Treating the Causes, Not the Symptoms
Creating a Non-Glaze Ceramic Slip or Engobe
Creating Your Own Budget Glaze
Crystal Glazes: Understanding the Process and Materials
Deflocculants: A Detailed Overview
Demonstrating Glaze Fit Issues to Students
Diagnosing a Casting Problem at a Sanitaryware Plant
Drying Ceramics Without Cracks
Duplicating Albany Slip
Duplicating AP Green Fireclay
Electric Hobby Kilns: What You Need to Know
Fighting the Glaze Dragon
Firing Clay Test Bars
Firing: What Happens to Ceramic Ware in a Firing Kiln
First You See It Then You Don't: Raku Glaze Stability
Fixing a glaze that does not stay in suspension
Formulating a body using clays native to your area
Formulating a Clear Glaze Compatible with Chrome-Tin Stains
Formulating a Porcelain
Formulating Ash and Native-Material Glazes
G1214M Cone 5-7 20x5 glossy transparent glaze
G1214W Cone 6 transparent glaze
G1214Z Cone 6 matte glaze
G1916M Cone 06-04 transparent glaze
Getting the Glaze Color You Want: Working With Stains
Glaze and Body Pigments and Stains in the Ceramic Tile Industry
Glaze Chemistry Basics - Formula, Analysis, Mole%, Unity
Glaze chemistry using a frit of approximate analysis
Glaze Recipes: Formulate and Make Your Own Instead
Glaze Types, Formulation and Application in the Tile Industry
Having Your Glaze Tested for Toxic Metal Release
High Gloss Glazes
Hire Us for a 3D Printing Project
How a Material Chemical Analysis is Done
How desktop INSIGHT Deals With Unity, LOI and Formula Weight
How to Find and Test Your Own Native Clays
I have always done it this way!
Inkjet Decoration of Ceramic Tiles
Is Your Fired Ware Safe?
Leaching Cone 6 Glaze Case Study
Limit Formulas and Target Formulas
Low Budget Testing of Ceramic Glazes
Make Your Own Ball Mill Stand
Making Glaze Testing Cones
Monoporosa or Single Fired Wall Tiles
Organic Matter in Clays: Detailed Overview
Outdoor Weather Resistant Ceramics
Painting Glazes Rather Than Dipping or Spraying
Particle Size Distribution of Ceramic Powders
Porcelain Tile, Vitrified Tile
Rationalizing Conflicting Opinions About Plasticity
Ravenscrag Slip is Born
Recylcing Scrap Clay
Reducing the Firing Temperature of a Glaze From Cone 10 to 6
Setting up a Clay Testing Program in Your Company or Studio
Simple Physical Testing of Clays
Single Fire Glazing
Soluble Salts in Minerals: Detailed Overview
Some Keys to Dealing With Firing Cracks
Stoneware Casting Body Recipes
Substituting Cornwall Stone
Super-Refined Terra Sigillata
The Chemistry, Physics and Manufacturing of Glaze Frits
The Effect of Glaze Fit on Fired Ware Strength
The Four Levels on Which to View Ceramic Glazes
The Majolica Earthenware Process
The Potter's Prayer
The Right Chemistry for a Cone 6 Magnesia Matte
The Trials of Being the Only Technical Person in the Club
The Whining Stops Here: A Realistic Look at Clay Bodies
Those Unlabelled Bags and Buckets
Tiles and Mosaics for Potters
Toxicity of Firebricks Used in Ovens
Trafficking in Glaze Recipes
Understanding Ceramic Materials
Understanding Ceramic Oxides
Understanding Glaze Slurry Properties
Understanding the Deflocculation Process in Slip Casting
Understanding the Terra Cotta Slip Casting Recipes In North America
Understanding Thermal Expansion in Ceramic Glazes
Unwanted Crystallization in a Cone 6 Glaze
Using Dextrin, Glycerine and CMC Gum together
Volcanic Ash
What Determines a Glaze's Firing Temperature?
What is a Mole, Checking Out the Mole
What is the Glaze Dragon?
Where do I start in understanding glazes?
Why Textbook Glazes Are So Difficult
Working with children
Making Glaze Testing Cones
Description
A standard shape and size of glaze test is important to be able to compare one test with another, especially over time (so that old tests look the same as new ones)
Article
Joe Schmidt, lab technician at
Plainsman
Clays, developed the glaze testing cone, it is very practical. It is a standard shape and size that is always used, this serves well for comparison and documentation purposes.
Advantages
They are easy to make.
They are easy to photograph
They are stable and less likely to tip over and break
They stack well in boxes
They display a glaze in a way that is akin to a piece of pottery or ceramic.
Steps to make these:
Print the pattern and cut it out
Roll the clay to 1/4 inch (6mm) thickness
Cut the shape out of the clay using the pattern
Apply a band of slip to one end and attach the other using a 15mm (1/2 inch overlap)
Press the joint firmly together (use a stick on the inside to support) and press the indentations
Dry the clay to leather hardness and carve a design on the side opposite the join (to show what it does on edges, in varying thickness around contours and on an uneven surface)
Stamp the identification of the clay at the bottom
Dry the testers carefully to avoid cracking
Use a knife to trim off any sharp edges
Bisque fire.
When dipping these in glaze consider the following:
Dip down to within 15mm (1/2 inch) of the base
Label clearly on the bare clay section
Dip the top half again for a double-thickness.
Pattern
Use the link below to download the pattern file.
Related Information
An example of the value of a good glaze testing sample.
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
These are made at
Plainsman
Clays in Alberta, Canada.
Preparing to make a glaze testing cone: cutting around the pattern
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
In this picture a piece of cardboard is used as a template, you can download a pattern using the URL link on this page.
Making a glaze testing cone: applying the slip for the join.
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
A viscous slip will make a better join and minimize the chance of water-splits developing at the edge of the overlap.
Making a glaze testing cone: finishing the join.
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
With most clays no scoring is needed, the slip and pressure are enough to make a good join.
Making a glaze testing cone: Incising the surface
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Glaze thickness
thins on the edges of the
incised
lines and thickens at their bases. This enables
variegating
glazes to showcase their visual effect with varying thickness. And these test the ability of opaque glazes to still cover well when the layer is thin.
Making a glaze testing cone: Stamping an identification.
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
The
code numbers
get recorded with the pictures in our testing system (an account at
insight-live
.com).
Links
URLs
https://digitalfire.com/4sight/images/GlazeConePattern.pdf
Glaze cone pattern -
Plainsman
Clays
Print this
PDF
file, cut out the shape and use it as a pattern for making glaze testing codes.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy