Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Articles
A ChatBot gives jaw-dropping glaze recipe advice - Jan 2025
A Low Cost Tester of Glaze Melt Fluidity
A One-speed Lab or Studio Slurry Mixer
A Textbook Cone 6 Matte Glaze With Problems
Adjusting Glaze Expansion by Calculation to Solve Shivering
Alberta Slip, 20 Years of Substitution for Albany Slip
An Overview of Ceramic Stains
Are You in Control of Your Production Process?
Are Your Glazes Food Safe or are They Leachable?
Attack on Glass: Corrosion Attack Mechanisms
Ball Milling Glazes, Bodies, Engobes
Binders for Ceramic Bodies
Bringing Out the Big Guns in Craze Control: MgO (G1215U)
Can We Help You Fix a Specific Problem?
Ceramic Glazes Today
Ceramic Material Nomenclature
Ceramic Tile Clay Body Formulation
Changing Our View of Glazes
Chemistry vs. Matrix Blending to Create Glazes from Native Materials
Concentrate on One Good Glaze
Copper Red Glazes
Crazing and Bacteria: Is There a Hazard?
Crazing in Stoneware Glazes: Treating the Causes, Not the Symptoms
Creating a Non-Glaze Ceramic Slip or Engobe
Creating Your Own Budget Glaze
Crystal Glazes: Understanding the Process and Materials
Deflocculants: A Detailed Overview
Demonstrating Glaze Fit Issues to Students
Diagnosing a Casting Problem at a Sanitaryware Plant
Drying Ceramics Without Cracks
Duplicating Albany Slip
Duplicating AP Green Fireclay
Electric Hobby Kilns: What You Need to Know
Fighting the Glaze Dragon
Firing Clay Test Bars
Firing: What Happens to Ceramic Ware in a Firing Kiln
First You See It Then You Don't: Raku Glaze Stability
Fixing a glaze that does not stay in suspension
Formulating a body using clays native to your area
Formulating a Clear Glaze Compatible with Chrome-Tin Stains
Formulating a Porcelain
Formulating Ash and Native-Material Glazes
G1214M Cone 5-7 20x5 glossy transparent glaze
G1214W Cone 6 transparent glaze
G1214Z Cone 6 matte glaze
G1916M Cone 06-04 transparent glaze
Getting the Glaze Color You Want: Working With Stains
Glaze and Body Pigments and Stains in the Ceramic Tile Industry
Glaze Chemistry Basics - Formula, Analysis, Mole%, Unity
Glaze chemistry using a frit of approximate analysis
Glaze Recipes: Formulate and Make Your Own Instead
Glaze Types, Formulation and Application in the Tile Industry
Having Your Glaze Tested for Toxic Metal Release
High Gloss Glazes
Hire Us for a 3D Printing Project
How a Material Chemical Analysis is Done
How desktop INSIGHT Deals With Unity, LOI and Formula Weight
How to Find and Test Your Own Native Clays
I have always done it this way!
Inkjet Decoration of Ceramic Tiles
Is Your Fired Ware Safe?
Leaching Cone 6 Glaze Case Study
Limit Formulas and Target Formulas
Low Budget Testing of Ceramic Glazes
Make Your Own Ball Mill Stand
Making Glaze Testing Cones
Monoporosa or Single Fired Wall Tiles
Organic Matter in Clays: Detailed Overview
Outdoor Weather Resistant Ceramics
Painting Glazes Rather Than Dipping or Spraying
Particle Size Distribution of Ceramic Powders
Porcelain Tile, Vitrified Tile
Rationalizing Conflicting Opinions About Plasticity
Ravenscrag Slip is Born
Recylcing Scrap Clay
Reducing the Firing Temperature of a Glaze From Cone 10 to 6
Setting up a Clay Testing Program in Your Company or Studio
Simple Physical Testing of Clays
Single Fire Glazing
Soluble Salts in Minerals: Detailed Overview
Some Keys to Dealing With Firing Cracks
Stoneware Casting Body Recipes
Substituting Cornwall Stone
Super-Refined Terra Sigillata
The Chemistry, Physics and Manufacturing of Glaze Frits
The Effect of Glaze Fit on Fired Ware Strength
The Four Levels on Which to View Ceramic Glazes
The Majolica Earthenware Process
The Potter's Prayer
The Right Chemistry for a Cone 6 Magnesia Matte
The Trials of Being the Only Technical Person in the Club
The Whining Stops Here: A Realistic Look at Clay Bodies
Those Unlabelled Bags and Buckets
Tiles and Mosaics for Potters
Toxicity of Firebricks Used in Ovens
Trafficking in Glaze Recipes
Understanding Ceramic Materials
Understanding Ceramic Oxides
Understanding Glaze Slurry Properties
Understanding the Deflocculation Process in Slip Casting
Understanding the Terra Cotta Slip Casting Recipes In North America
Understanding Thermal Expansion in Ceramic Glazes
Unwanted Crystallization in a Cone 6 Glaze
Using Dextrin, Glycerine and CMC Gum together
Volcanic Ash
What Determines a Glaze's Firing Temperature?
What is a Mole, Checking Out the Mole
What is the Glaze Dragon?
Where do I start in understanding glazes?
Why Textbook Glazes Are So Difficult
Working with children
The Right Chemistry for a Cone 6 Magnesia Matte
The image (link below) compares the
chemistry
and recipes of four high-MgO matte glazes. The glaze on the far right is the initiator, the one against which the others are being compared. It is
G2928C
, a
cone 6
Ravenscrag
Slip matte (R-Matte) developed from Moore's matte original (has some tin to whiten it). It is conservative (is not as matte as the two others to its left, but it does not cutlery mark). It has a low
Si:Al
ratio and maximum recommended
MgO
and quite a bit of
KNaO
. But I wanted to understand what the implications were of adding and removing
SiO
2
and
Al
2
O
3
in a
magnesia matte
, how much of a role does the MgO play. Well, it appears MgO is the key, the rest of the recipe can vary quite alot.
3728A is our original dolomite-testing recipe (Dolo-matte). It is 27%
dolomite
. It takes MgO to 0.4 molar and has very little KNaO. It has a stunning ivory surface, but cutlery marks. It has much lower SiO
2
and half the Al
2
O
3
yet does not flow more (because of the greater MgO and less potent CaO-dominant
flux
mix).
2934 is more matte than R-Matte. It has more MgO and
CaO
at the expense of KNaO and Si:Al (the Si:Al ratio is the same). Amazingly it is actually flowing better. It does not cutlery-mark. The color is darker than Dolo-matte because it is developing a more complete glass that gives depth.
2934A was done to see if MgO would matte a high
silica
version. The Al
2
O
3
was dropped way down, the SiO
2
taken upward for a ratio more than double R-Matte. You would think it would flow the same because the total Si+Al is actually less. But no. Does Al
2
O
3
have to be high for this to work? No, Dolo-matte has low Al
2
O
3
. Is a low ratio needed? No Dolo-matte has a higher ratio that 2934 yet is more matte. Is significant KNaO needed? No, Dolo-matte and 2934 have very low KNaO.
So I think I know: You need lots of MgO, that is the magic. High or low Al
2
O
3
, but there is a SiO
2
sweet-spot where a non-markable glass develops. You don't need a lot of
boron
, this only has 0.1 (some cone 6 glazes have 5 times that). I am going to put a little tin in 2934 and raise (yes, I said raise) the silica a little for just slightly more matte.
Related Information
Exporting insight-live recipes to a CSV file
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
An
Insight-live
page displaying four
cone 6
matte recipes. It has been exported to a CSV file which I have opened in my spreadsheet software. I then reorganized it to compare these 4 glazes and relate the
chemistry
to the
melt flow
tests.
Links
Glossary
Cutlery Marking
Ceramic glazes that mark from cutlery are either not properly melted (lack
flux
), melted too much (lacking
SiO2
and
Al2O3
), or have a micro-abrasive surface that abrades metal from cutlery.
Recipes
G2934 - Matte Glaze Base for Cone 6
A base
MgO
matte glaze
recipe fires to a hard utilitarian surface and has very good working properties. Blend in the glossy if it is too matte.
Recipes
G1214Z1 - Cone 6 Silky CaO matte base glaze
This glaze was born as a demonstration of how to use
chemistry
to convert a glossy
cone 6
glaze into a matte.
Articles
G1214Z Cone 6 matte glaze
This glaze was developed using the 1214W glossy as a starting point. This article overviews the types of matte glazes and rationalizes the method used to make this one.
Oxides
MgO - Magnesium Oxide, Magnesia
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy