Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Articles
A ChatBot gives jaw-dropping glaze recipe advice - Jan 2025
A Low Cost Tester of Glaze Melt Fluidity
A One-speed Lab or Studio Slurry Mixer
A Textbook Cone 6 Matte Glaze With Problems
Adjusting Glaze Expansion by Calculation to Solve Shivering
Alberta Slip, 20 Years of Substitution for Albany Slip
An Overview of Ceramic Stains
Are You in Control of Your Production Process?
Are Your Glazes Food Safe or are They Leachable?
Attack on Glass: Corrosion Attack Mechanisms
Ball Milling Glazes, Bodies, Engobes
Binders for Ceramic Bodies
Bringing Out the Big Guns in Craze Control: MgO (G1215U)
Can We Help You Fix a Specific Problem?
Ceramic Glazes Today
Ceramic Material Nomenclature
Ceramic Tile Clay Body Formulation
Changing Our View of Glazes
Chemistry vs. Matrix Blending to Create Glazes from Native Materials
Concentrate on One Good Glaze
Copper Red Glazes
Crazing and Bacteria: Is There a Hazard?
Crazing in Stoneware Glazes: Treating the Causes, Not the Symptoms
Creating a Non-Glaze Ceramic Slip or Engobe
Creating Your Own Budget Glaze
Crystal Glazes: Understanding the Process and Materials
Deflocculants: A Detailed Overview
Demonstrating Glaze Fit Issues to Students
Diagnosing a Casting Problem at a Sanitaryware Plant
Drying Ceramics Without Cracks
Duplicating Albany Slip
Duplicating AP Green Fireclay
Electric Hobby Kilns: What You Need to Know
Fighting the Glaze Dragon
Firing Clay Test Bars
Firing: What Happens to Ceramic Ware in a Firing Kiln
First You See It Then You Don't: Raku Glaze Stability
Fixing a glaze that does not stay in suspension
Formulating a body using clays native to your area
Formulating a Clear Glaze Compatible with Chrome-Tin Stains
Formulating a Porcelain
Formulating Ash and Native-Material Glazes
G1214M Cone 5-7 20x5 glossy transparent glaze
G1214W Cone 6 transparent glaze
G1214Z Cone 6 matte glaze
G1916M Cone 06-04 transparent glaze
Getting the Glaze Color You Want: Working With Stains
Glaze and Body Pigments and Stains in the Ceramic Tile Industry
Glaze Chemistry Basics - Formula, Analysis, Mole%, Unity
Glaze chemistry using a frit of approximate analysis
Glaze Recipes: Formulate and Make Your Own Instead
Glaze Types, Formulation and Application in the Tile Industry
Having Your Glaze Tested for Toxic Metal Release
High Gloss Glazes
Hire Us for a 3D Printing Project
How a Material Chemical Analysis is Done
How desktop INSIGHT Deals With Unity, LOI and Formula Weight
How to Find and Test Your Own Native Clays
I have always done it this way!
Inkjet Decoration of Ceramic Tiles
Is Your Fired Ware Safe?
Leaching Cone 6 Glaze Case Study
Limit Formulas and Target Formulas
Low Budget Testing of Ceramic Glazes
Make Your Own Ball Mill Stand
Making Glaze Testing Cones
Monoporosa or Single Fired Wall Tiles
Organic Matter in Clays: Detailed Overview
Outdoor Weather Resistant Ceramics
Painting Glazes Rather Than Dipping or Spraying
Particle Size Distribution of Ceramic Powders
Porcelain Tile, Vitrified Tile
Rationalizing Conflicting Opinions About Plasticity
Ravenscrag Slip is Born
Recylcing Scrap Clay
Reducing the Firing Temperature of a Glaze From Cone 10 to 6
Setting up a Clay Testing Program in Your Company or Studio
Simple Physical Testing of Clays
Single Fire Glazing
Soluble Salts in Minerals: Detailed Overview
Some Keys to Dealing With Firing Cracks
Stoneware Casting Body Recipes
Substituting Cornwall Stone
Super-Refined Terra Sigillata
The Chemistry, Physics and Manufacturing of Glaze Frits
The Effect of Glaze Fit on Fired Ware Strength
The Four Levels on Which to View Ceramic Glazes
The Majolica Earthenware Process
The Potter's Prayer
The Right Chemistry for a Cone 6 Magnesia Matte
The Trials of Being the Only Technical Person in the Club
The Whining Stops Here: A Realistic Look at Clay Bodies
Those Unlabelled Bags and Buckets
Tiles and Mosaics for Potters
Toxicity of Firebricks Used in Ovens
Trafficking in Glaze Recipes
Understanding Ceramic Materials
Understanding Ceramic Oxides
Understanding Glaze Slurry Properties
Understanding the Deflocculation Process in Slip Casting
Understanding the Terra Cotta Slip Casting Recipes In North America
Understanding Thermal Expansion in Ceramic Glazes
Unwanted Crystallization in a Cone 6 Glaze
Using Dextrin, Glycerine and CMC Gum together
Volcanic Ash
What Determines a Glaze's Firing Temperature?
What is a Mole, Checking Out the Mole
What is the Glaze Dragon?
Where do I start in understanding glazes?
Why Textbook Glazes Are So Difficult
Working with children
A Textbook Cone 6 Matte Glaze With Problems
Description
Glazes must be completely melted to be functional, hard and strong. Many are not. This compares two glazes to make the difference clear.
Article
The picture below is a flow tester that was fired at
cone 6
. The tester itself is
Plainsman
M370
. The glaze on the right is
G1214W
, a typical cone 6 transparent used by potters. It is
fluxed
by a
boron
sourcing
frit
. The glaze on the left is typical of what many use to achieve a matte. The recipe is:
Nepheline Syenite
40.00
Dolomite
15.00
Whiting
10.00
Ball Clay
20.00
China Clay
10.00
Silica
5.00
But this glaze is not flowing at all whereas the boron-fluxed glaze has run right to the bottom (and it is not even considered a highly fluid glaze). This simple comparison teaches us many things about glazes and even ourselves. Here are some of them.
Cone 6 glazes require boron (from
frits
or
gerstley borate
) or zinc to melt (the one on the left has neither). Materials like
feldspar
,
dolomite
, whiting and
talc
just do not melt well at all at cone 6. If a glaze is not properly melted then it is not hard and strong and resistant to
leaching
and
cutlery marking
.
Textbook
glaze recipes
often are junk. Unquestioned use of them demonstrates our willingness to accept something ridiculous just because it is in a book or on a web page. We need use common sense when looking at glaze recipes for cone 6 to determine if they are for real or impostors (the glaze on the left is actually really not a glaze, it is a
porcelain
). If there is no frit, no zinc, no gerstley
borate
, then a red this-likely-does-not-melt light is
flashing
.
Glazes with high feldspar or
nepheline syenite
(40% is really high) are likely to
craze
. If this one does not craze it is simply because it has not melt enough for the sodium to impose its high
thermal expansion
on the glass.
A cone 6 glaze with 30% clay (in this case
ball clay
and
kaolin
) and no boron is certainly not going to melt well because clay is
refractory
.
True matte glazes have high alumina and low
silica
(which this has) but they also need to melt well to form a glass (which this does not). So this is just a matte because it is not melted.
If a white-firing glaze has no
zircon
or
tin oxide
, then how can it be white? Something is wrong. In this case it is white simply because it is not melted.
Since this does not melt, evaluating it on the basis of its
chemistry
would be invalid.
Glaze chemistry
theory depends on the glaze being melted to a homogeneous glass. Thus, in addition to knowing all about the chemistry, you need to have common sense on the recipe level also.
Understanding your glazes is so much better, especially when it comes to dealing with their problems (and this one would have plenty!).
Related Information
Before spending time trying online recipes, take a minute to do a sanity check on them
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
This is a
cone 6
GLFL test
to compare
melt-flow
between a matte recipe, found online at a respected website, and a glaze we use often. Yes, it is matte. But why? Because it is not melted! Matte glazes used on
functional
surfaces need to melt well, they should flow like a
glossy glaze
. Even though this recipe has 40%
nepheline syenite
, lots of
dolomite
and
calcium carbonate
it is not melting. Yes, these are powerful fluxes, but at cone 10, not cone 6! To melt a cone 6 glaze
boron
, zinc or lithia are needed. Boron is the most common and best general-purpose melter for potters (it comes mainly in
frits
,
Gerstley borate
). The concept of a
limit recipe
applies here, the idea of eye-balling a recipe and quickly assessing if it is ridiculous or not.
A functional matte cone 6 glaze should melt as well as a glossy
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
True
functional
mattes have fluid melts, like glossy glazes. They need this in order to develop a hard, non-scratching, durable glass. The
mechanism
of the
G1214Z1
matte on the right is high
Al
2
O
3
, it is actually melting more than the glossy
G1214W
on the left (this was fired between
cone 5
and 6, it normally runs right off the runway).
Links
Articles
A Low Cost Tester of Glaze Melt Fluidity
Use this novel device to compare the
melt fluidity
of glazes and materials. Simple physical observations of the results provide a better understanding of the fired properties of your glaze (and problems you did not see before).
Articles
What Determines a Glaze's Firing Temperature?
The
oxides
contributed by glaze materials determine its
chemistry
. The chemistry is the main factor determining melting behaviour. But the
particle sizes
, shapes and mineralogies also come in to play.
Articles
Why Textbook Glazes Are So Difficult
The trade is
glaze recipes
has spawned generations of potters going up blind alleys trying recipes that don't work and living with ones that are much more trouble than they are worth. It is time to leave this behind and take control.
Articles
Reducing the Firing Temperature of a Glaze From Cone 10 to 6
Moving a cone 10
high temperature glaze
down to cone 5-6 can require major surgery on the recipe or the transplantation of the color and surface
mechanisms
into a similar
cone 6
base glaze
.
Articles
Trafficking in Glaze Recipes
The trade is
glaze recipes
has spawned generations of potters going up blind alleys trying recipes that don't work and living with ones that are much more trouble than they are worth. It is time to leave this behind and take control.
Glossary
Matte Glaze
Random material mixes that melt well overwhelmingly want to be glossy, creating a
matte glaze
that is also
functional
is not an easy task.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy