Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Articles
A ChatBot gives jaw-dropping glaze recipe advice - Jan 2025
A Low Cost Tester of Glaze Melt Fluidity
A One-speed Lab or Studio Slurry Mixer
A Textbook Cone 6 Matte Glaze With Problems
Adjusting Glaze Expansion by Calculation to Solve Shivering
Alberta Slip, 20 Years of Substitution for Albany Slip
An Overview of Ceramic Stains
Are You in Control of Your Production Process?
Are Your Glazes Food Safe or are They Leachable?
Attack on Glass: Corrosion Attack Mechanisms
Ball Milling Glazes, Bodies, Engobes
Binders for Ceramic Bodies
Bringing Out the Big Guns in Craze Control: MgO (G1215U)
Can We Help You Fix a Specific Problem?
Ceramic Glazes Today
Ceramic Material Nomenclature
Ceramic Tile Clay Body Formulation
Changing Our View of Glazes
Chemistry vs. Matrix Blending to Create Glazes from Native Materials
Concentrate on One Good Glaze
Copper Red Glazes
Crazing and Bacteria: Is There a Hazard?
Crazing in Stoneware Glazes: Treating the Causes, Not the Symptoms
Creating a Non-Glaze Ceramic Slip or Engobe
Creating Your Own Budget Glaze
Crystal Glazes: Understanding the Process and Materials
Deflocculants: A Detailed Overview
Demonstrating Glaze Fit Issues to Students
Diagnosing a Casting Problem at a Sanitaryware Plant
Drying Ceramics Without Cracks
Duplicating Albany Slip
Duplicating AP Green Fireclay
Electric Hobby Kilns: What You Need to Know
Fighting the Glaze Dragon
Firing Clay Test Bars
Firing: What Happens to Ceramic Ware in a Firing Kiln
First You See It Then You Don't: Raku Glaze Stability
Fixing a glaze that does not stay in suspension
Formulating a body using clays native to your area
Formulating a Clear Glaze Compatible with Chrome-Tin Stains
Formulating a Porcelain
Formulating Ash and Native-Material Glazes
G1214M Cone 5-7 20x5 glossy transparent glaze
G1214W Cone 6 transparent glaze
G1214Z Cone 6 matte glaze
G1916M Cone 06-04 transparent glaze
Getting the Glaze Color You Want: Working With Stains
Glaze and Body Pigments and Stains in the Ceramic Tile Industry
Glaze Chemistry Basics - Formula, Analysis, Mole%, Unity
Glaze chemistry using a frit of approximate analysis
Glaze Recipes: Formulate and Make Your Own Instead
Glaze Types, Formulation and Application in the Tile Industry
Having Your Glaze Tested for Toxic Metal Release
High Gloss Glazes
Hire Us for a 3D Printing Project
How a Material Chemical Analysis is Done
How desktop INSIGHT Deals With Unity, LOI and Formula Weight
How to Find and Test Your Own Native Clays
I have always done it this way!
Inkjet Decoration of Ceramic Tiles
Is Your Fired Ware Safe?
Leaching Cone 6 Glaze Case Study
Limit Formulas and Target Formulas
Low Budget Testing of Ceramic Glazes
Make Your Own Ball Mill Stand
Making Glaze Testing Cones
Monoporosa or Single Fired Wall Tiles
Organic Matter in Clays: Detailed Overview
Outdoor Weather Resistant Ceramics
Painting Glazes Rather Than Dipping or Spraying
Particle Size Distribution of Ceramic Powders
Porcelain Tile, Vitrified Tile
Rationalizing Conflicting Opinions About Plasticity
Ravenscrag Slip is Born
Recylcing Scrap Clay
Reducing the Firing Temperature of a Glaze From Cone 10 to 6
Setting up a Clay Testing Program in Your Company or Studio
Simple Physical Testing of Clays
Single Fire Glazing
Soluble Salts in Minerals: Detailed Overview
Some Keys to Dealing With Firing Cracks
Stoneware Casting Body Recipes
Substituting Cornwall Stone
Super-Refined Terra Sigillata
The Chemistry, Physics and Manufacturing of Glaze Frits
The Effect of Glaze Fit on Fired Ware Strength
The Four Levels on Which to View Ceramic Glazes
The Majolica Earthenware Process
The Potter's Prayer
The Right Chemistry for a Cone 6 Magnesia Matte
The Trials of Being the Only Technical Person in the Club
The Whining Stops Here: A Realistic Look at Clay Bodies
Those Unlabelled Bags and Buckets
Tiles and Mosaics for Potters
Toxicity of Firebricks Used in Ovens
Trafficking in Glaze Recipes
Understanding Ceramic Materials
Understanding Ceramic Oxides
Understanding Glaze Slurry Properties
Understanding the Deflocculation Process in Slip Casting
Understanding the Terra Cotta Slip Casting Recipes In North America
Understanding Thermal Expansion in Ceramic Glazes
Unwanted Crystallization in a Cone 6 Glaze
Using Dextrin, Glycerine and CMC Gum together
Volcanic Ash
What Determines a Glaze's Firing Temperature?
What is a Mole, Checking Out the Mole
What is the Glaze Dragon?
Where do I start in understanding glazes?
Why Textbook Glazes Are So Difficult
Working with children
An Overview of Ceramic Stains
Description
Understanding the advantages of disadvantages of stains vs. oxide colors is the key to choosing the best approach
Article
Stains are fired blends of metal and ceramic
oxides
that have been reground
into a fine powder.
Stains
containing otherwise toxic oxides can be employed
without significant dangers. This is the first aspect of something that stains
have that coloring oxides don't: stability. A second aspect of stability is that
stains produce much more consistent and repeatable color than using raw oxide
colors.
Stains are most popular at lower temperatures where colors tend to be
brighter. However most stains can be used right up to high fire. Premixed low
fire glazes are typically made by blending stains and commercial
frits
and other
than following firing instructions, users of these products give little thought
to the technical challenges that were overcome to produce them. This is a third
key advantage of stains: the ability to target a specific color. Many ceramic
color shades (i.e. reds) are difficult to achieve and beyond the abilities of
end users.
While many stains are 'standard' and their composition is well known across
the industry, others are proprietary. Stain companies don't release the exact
makeup of stains but they do tell us the 'system'. For example, a green stain
might contain chrome, cobalt and
silica
and be labeled 'CrCoSi'. Although silica
is not a
colorant
itself, it is included to create a stable silicate crystal
structure with the other two.
Stain companies often supply multiple products to produce a given color using
different oxide systems (i.e. chrome-tin pink, manganese-alumina pink). Various
factors like the base
glaze chemistry
, color shade, temperature, and end use
determine the system you should choose. Knowing how to calculate the oxide
makeup of a glaze or dealing with a stain company that provides good service are
key factor to being able to troubleshoot color problems with stains.
Thus stains do not come with a 'unconditional color guarantee'. The shade
produced depends on many of factors including the host glaze
chemistry
, on/over/underglaze
use,
glaze thickness
, amount of
opacifier
, firing temperature, etc. Achieving
colors with stains is certainly easier, but it is not a 'no-brainer'. Certain
systems are quite flexible and produce color in many kinds of glazes (ie. cobalt
silicate). Other systems either require that certain oxides be present in the
host glaze in minimum amounts or others not be present at all. The symbiosis of
host glaze chemistry and stain, for example, can be demonstrated with chrome-tin
stains. They will not develop color if zinc is present or if there is inadequate
calcia. It is common to hear people say that their pink stain 'burned out', but
generally the stain is being used in an incompatible glaze base. Another
interesting demonstration of these factors is the color chart of a typical stain
company. These charts show the stain used in one or more
fritted
base glazes
that are selected to be compatible with as many of the colors as possible.
Certain samples will also have added opacifier and zinc, for example.
Admittedly, stains can produce homogeneous color which can be less
interesting than the variegated and speckled color effects that can be achieved
with raw
metal oxides
like iron, cobalt, copper, etc. But for manufacturing, it
cannot be ignored that stains are far more consistent and reliable to use. Still,
variegating
agents can be added (like
titanium
and
rutile
).
Potters love to paint stains over and under glazes to decorate ware.
Majolica
ware is a good example. However, stains are
refractory
, they resist allowing overlying glazes to envelope the particles and then fasten onto the underlying body. Stains used for
underglaze
decoration, for example, need to be mixed with a recipe of materials into which they can melt and suspend, one that melts enough to attach to the body but not so much so as to bleed excessively into the overlying glaze. Different stain types require mediums of different chemistry, ones that enable the color development and have the proper degree-of-melt. Some stains tend to crystallize the surface if used
overglaze
. Likewise, if stains are used underglaze they vary in their willingness to allow the overglaze to penetrate through to form and
interface
with the body. Stains don't suspend well in water to create a paintable material either so it is necessary to mix them with something that will suspend the particles, slow down the drying and harden when dried.
Stains exist either in the context of the huge industrial ceramic industry or
in the hobby, pottery, and
ceramics
markets. Large industries either have
in-house technical people or contract consultants. Small users do not have this
luxury. They should know that certain stain companies, (i.e. Mason) have
developed excellent reputations for dealing with smaller volumes and providing
support.
A fired glaze can leach heavy metals whether these metals are sourced from a stain or from raw metal oxides. Stains are made from the same metal oxides you would use to get the color, they have simply been prefired and blended for specific colors and often mixed with other materials to make them melt higher or leach less. Thus you should have your glazes tested for
leaching
if you are making
functional
ware having stained food surfaces. Better yet, use a
liner glaze
. There are many factors that determine if a glaze is leachable (for more information
see the links on this page).
Related Information
Why pure stain powders make poor inks, slips, underglazes and overglazes
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
On the left are pure blue stain brush strokes, on the right are green ones (both painted over a glaze). Clearly, the green is
refractory
, stiffening the glaze enough to trap bubbles and sit on the surface as a dry, unmelted layer. The blue is the opposite, melting and
bleeding
profusely into the glaze. Under the glaze, these problems would be magnified (the blue bleeding more, the green causing
crawling
and
blistering
).
Stains
are not ceramic, they are ceramic additives. Stains are not safe for direct food contact. Stains are expensive. Stains don't suspend in water, paint poorly and dry as a lose powder. These stains each need to be added, as a minor percentage, to a ceramic painting medium (one with
CMC gum
and a mix of ceramic materials tailored to melt to the desired degree and have a compatible
chemistry
for develop the color (as per manufacturer guidelines).
Links
Articles
Are Your Glazes Food Safe or are They Leachable?
Many potters do not think about
leaching
, but times are changing. What is the
chemistry
of stability? There are simple ways to check for leaching, and fix
crazing
.
Articles
Having Your Glaze Tested for Toxic Metal Release
Having Your Glaze Tested for Metal Release
Articles
Is Your Fired Ware Safe?
Glazed ware can be a safety hazard to end users because it may leach metals into food and drink, it could harbor bacteria and it could flake of in knife-edged pieces.
Articles
Getting the Glaze Color You Want: Working With Stains
There are many things to know about to make the best use of
stains
, but one often ignored aspect is the relationship between glaze color and
chemistry
. If you want to control color you need to know about stains and chemistry.
Articles
Glaze and Body Pigments and Stains in the Ceramic Tile Industry
A complete discussion of how ceramic pigments and
stains
are manufactured and used in the tile industry. It includes theory, types, colors,
opacification
, processing, particles size, testing information.
Materials
Stain
Recipes
G2853B - Cone 04 Clear Ravenscrag School Glaze
A
Ravenscrag
Slip base made by simply mixing it 50:50 with a frit
Oxides
MnO2 - Manganese Dioxide
Projects
Stains
Glossary
Ceramic Stain
Ceramic
stains
are manufactured powders. They are used as an alternative to employing metal oxide powders and have many advantages.
URLs
https://www.masoncolor.com/reference-guide
Mason Color Reference Guide
A large chart showing each stain. The rows are grouped according to type and each row has tags that references temperature capability and
chemistry
requirement for the host glaze. There are also columns for each element and the rows have check marks for each contained.
Hazards
Are colored porcelains hazardous?
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy