Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Articles
A ChatBot gives jaw-dropping glaze recipe advice - Jan 2025
A Low Cost Tester of Glaze Melt Fluidity
A One-speed Lab or Studio Slurry Mixer
A Textbook Cone 6 Matte Glaze With Problems
Adjusting Glaze Expansion by Calculation to Solve Shivering
Alberta Slip, 20 Years of Substitution for Albany Slip
An Overview of Ceramic Stains
Are You in Control of Your Production Process?
Are Your Glazes Food Safe or are They Leachable?
Attack on Glass: Corrosion Attack Mechanisms
Ball Milling Glazes, Bodies, Engobes
Binders for Ceramic Bodies
Bringing Out the Big Guns in Craze Control: MgO (G1215U)
Can We Help You Fix a Specific Problem?
Ceramic Glazes Today
Ceramic Material Nomenclature
Ceramic Tile Clay Body Formulation
Changing Our View of Glazes
Chemistry vs. Matrix Blending to Create Glazes from Native Materials
Concentrate on One Good Glaze
Copper Red Glazes
Crazing and Bacteria: Is There a Hazard?
Crazing in Stoneware Glazes: Treating the Causes, Not the Symptoms
Creating a Non-Glaze Ceramic Slip or Engobe
Creating Your Own Budget Glaze
Crystal Glazes: Understanding the Process and Materials
Deflocculants: A Detailed Overview
Demonstrating Glaze Fit Issues to Students
Diagnosing a Casting Problem at a Sanitaryware Plant
Drying Ceramics Without Cracks
Duplicating Albany Slip
Duplicating AP Green Fireclay
Electric Hobby Kilns: What You Need to Know
Fighting the Glaze Dragon
Firing Clay Test Bars
Firing: What Happens to Ceramic Ware in a Firing Kiln
First You See It Then You Don't: Raku Glaze Stability
Fixing a glaze that does not stay in suspension
Formulating a body using clays native to your area
Formulating a Clear Glaze Compatible with Chrome-Tin Stains
Formulating a Porcelain
Formulating Ash and Native-Material Glazes
G1214M Cone 5-7 20x5 glossy transparent glaze
G1214W Cone 6 transparent glaze
G1214Z Cone 6 matte glaze
G1916M Cone 06-04 transparent glaze
Getting the Glaze Color You Want: Working With Stains
Glaze and Body Pigments and Stains in the Ceramic Tile Industry
Glaze Chemistry Basics - Formula, Analysis, Mole%, Unity
Glaze chemistry using a frit of approximate analysis
Glaze Recipes: Formulate and Make Your Own Instead
Glaze Types, Formulation and Application in the Tile Industry
Having Your Glaze Tested for Toxic Metal Release
High Gloss Glazes
Hire Us for a 3D Printing Project
How a Material Chemical Analysis is Done
How desktop INSIGHT Deals With Unity, LOI and Formula Weight
How to Find and Test Your Own Native Clays
I have always done it this way!
Inkjet Decoration of Ceramic Tiles
Is Your Fired Ware Safe?
Leaching Cone 6 Glaze Case Study
Limit Formulas and Target Formulas
Low Budget Testing of Ceramic Glazes
Make Your Own Ball Mill Stand
Making Glaze Testing Cones
Monoporosa or Single Fired Wall Tiles
Organic Matter in Clays: Detailed Overview
Outdoor Weather Resistant Ceramics
Painting Glazes Rather Than Dipping or Spraying
Particle Size Distribution of Ceramic Powders
Porcelain Tile, Vitrified Tile
Rationalizing Conflicting Opinions About Plasticity
Ravenscrag Slip is Born
Recylcing Scrap Clay
Reducing the Firing Temperature of a Glaze From Cone 10 to 6
Setting up a Clay Testing Program in Your Company or Studio
Simple Physical Testing of Clays
Single Fire Glazing
Soluble Salts in Minerals: Detailed Overview
Some Keys to Dealing With Firing Cracks
Stoneware Casting Body Recipes
Substituting Cornwall Stone
Super-Refined Terra Sigillata
The Chemistry, Physics and Manufacturing of Glaze Frits
The Effect of Glaze Fit on Fired Ware Strength
The Four Levels on Which to View Ceramic Glazes
The Majolica Earthenware Process
The Potter's Prayer
The Right Chemistry for a Cone 6 Magnesia Matte
The Trials of Being the Only Technical Person in the Club
The Whining Stops Here: A Realistic Look at Clay Bodies
Those Unlabelled Bags and Buckets
Tiles and Mosaics for Potters
Toxicity of Firebricks Used in Ovens
Trafficking in Glaze Recipes
Understanding Ceramic Materials
Understanding Ceramic Oxides
Understanding Glaze Slurry Properties
Understanding the Deflocculation Process in Slip Casting
Understanding the Terra Cotta Slip Casting Recipes In North America
Understanding Thermal Expansion in Ceramic Glazes
Unwanted Crystallization in a Cone 6 Glaze
Using Dextrin, Glycerine and CMC Gum together
Volcanic Ash
What Determines a Glaze's Firing Temperature?
What is a Mole, Checking Out the Mole
What is the Glaze Dragon?
Where do I start in understanding glazes?
Why Textbook Glazes Are So Difficult
Working with children
Formulating a body using clays native to your area
Description
Being able to mix your own clay body and glaze from native materials might seem ridiculous, yet Covid-19 taught us about the need for independence.
Article
Would you like to be more independent? Understand your
clay body
? Employ native materials body recipes? Be able to adjust and improve them? Even formulate bodies from scratch? The first step is to find a clay in your area. Read the article (link below) on how to find and test your own native materials. Consider some of the possibilities of what you might find:
-A best-case scenario is that you find pentunse in China, a "Mother Natures
porcelain
". Just add
kaolin
and
bentonite
.
PV Clay
from California is a similar story. Also
3B
clay from
Plainsman
Clays.
-What might appear to be a worst-case scenario is that you find a
fireclay
. What good would that be for pottery? Fireclays are often just the crude form of ball clays.
Slurry
and screen and add about 30%
feldspar
and you have a
cone 6
stoneware
. A super plastic one.
-If your clay is extremely sticky and takes a long time to dry it could be
bentonitic
. That means that it is best used as an additive to other clays that are less workable, to impart
plasticity
. Bodies made having a high percentage of bentonite can be
thrown
incredibly thin on the potter's wheel. But they must be dried very slowly to avoid cracking.
-If your clay is dark-colored (brown or red) then it could be a middle temperature stoneware (as demonstrated in your initial firing tests as described in the already-referenced article). Plainsman
M2
is such a material. These clays are among the most sought after by stoneware potters for the beautiful natural-looking surfaces they can produce around
2200F
. Because iron (which produces the brown color) is also a
flux
, these types of clays rarely have a firing curve the extends to cone 10.
-Dark colored clays can also be
terra cotta
clays. Terra cottas are also often shades of green and yellow. This demonstrates the amazing number of forms in which the
iron oxide
in the clays can exist, each having its own color. Terra cotta clays have a short firing range, but with modern kilns that is not a problem. Every clay has an optimal firing range at which it produces the most dense and strong fired product, terra cotta is no different. While the point of
maximum density
for mid and high temperature materials often never finds zero
porosity
, terra cotta materials often do. That is the density of glass, creating amazingly strong ware. Actually, firing shy of that, permitting some porosity, can produce beautiful red color and also very good strength. It can be rewarding and a real adventure, finding successful glazes and processes for this type of material.
-If your clay is grey or buff or even white, you may found a buff burning stoneware. These are common in nature, and obviously very useful. If they are not quite
vitreous
enough, a little
talc
(1-2%) may be all that is needed. Failing that, some feldspar should make them vitrify at cone 6. At cone 10 they could work all by themselves (Plainsman
A3
is an example).
-You may be lucky enough to find a kaolin. White, not very plastic, incredibly smooth. But having plenty of gravel and sand and mineral particle impurities. These clays may not look promising at first, but try to see them for what they could be if you screen out the impurities.
-If your clay is grey, even dark grey, you likely have a
ball clay
. Treat it like the fireclay mentioned above. That being said, some ball clays can be quite white in color. They are a very special find, gifting plasticity and fired whiteness in the same package. Typically they just need a non-plastic filler. Since ball clays are
refractory
, you need to add feldspar anyway, so that does double duty as the filler and plasticity cutter. It is also likely that some quartz will be needed for
glaze fit
, that will further cut the plasticity and bring it into the range of what a
throwing
body should be.
In any of the clays above you may encounter
soluble salts
that cause
efflorescence
(an unsightly scum on the fired surface, see the article referenced below for more info).
With all of these clays you will need to slurry and dewater them for use (unless you have a clay mixer). The advantage of
slurrying
is that it presents the option of wet-screening to remove impurities.
Related Information
A Super Plastic Stoneware Made With Two Materials
This mix showcases stoneware's advantages over porcelain
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Left: 65% #6Tile
kaolin
and 35%
nepheline syenite
. Although it has great
plasticity
and fires white, it crazes the glaze and has 1% fired
porosity
(using the
SHAB test
).
Right: 65% M23 Old Hickory
ball clay
(similar to OM#4) and 35% nepheline syenite (
feldspar
would also work). The glaze fits, the body fires very dense (zero porosity) and plasticity is fantastic!
The body on the left needs a 20%
silica
addition (to stop the
crazing
) and more nepheline (to reduce porosity to
porcelain
levels). The remaining 40% kaolin will not be nearly enough for a workable plasticity (so
bentonite
will be needed). The body on the right does not need fixing; it works as is. Many feel that
stoneware
body recipes must be built on a feldspar-containing base clay having pottery plasticity (adding ball clay, kaolin, feldspar and silica and ending up with needlessly complicated recipes). But, ball clay is a base, all it needs is a non-plastic filler (to cut plasticity and therefore
drying shrinkage
) and a
flux
to vitrify it - feldspar or nepheline fills both roles.
Of course, this stoneware does not fire as white. But do you need white? Glazes will fire brightly colored on this surface. And, cleaner ball clays are available in many areas (even ball clays intended for casting will be plastic enough). It is also worth considering the use of a white
engobe
.
The top pile of clay can make one million coffee mugs. The bottom one can glaze ten million!
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
These are raw clays behind the
Plainsman
Clays plant. The top one is a middle temperature
stoneware
. All it needs is a little
bentonite
(about 2-3%) to be a plastic, smooth,
vitreous
throwing
body. If it was not
mature
at
cone 6
, that would be easy to fix by the addition of a little
feldspar
. Any fired-speck-producing impurities can be removed by using a
propeller mixer
to
slurry
it and then putting it through a screen (e.g. 60 mesh). After dewatering on a
plaster table
I am ready-to-go. And that bottom pile? That is the main ingredient in
Ravenscrag
Slip. All it needs is some feldspar and
frit
to be a
base glaze
at cone 6. It is non-plastic and easy to screen (although not really needed since it has few particulate impurities). Likely there are clays in your area you could use to make your own
clay bodies
and glazes also. The key is to
characterize
the material first so you know what type of body it would be best for and what to add to get it there.
Red burning, customer-found terra cotta clays charachterized
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
We tested four different clays (brought in by customers). One is from BC and three from Alberta. These fired sample bars show rich color, low
soluble salts
and high density and strength at very low temperatures. L4233 (left):
Cone 06
to 3 (bottom to top). Reaches stoneware-density at cone 02 (middle bar).
Plasticity
is very low (
drying shrinkage
is only 4.5%). But, it is stable even if over-fired. L4254 (center bottom):
Cone 04
,02,3,4 (bottom to top). Very fine particled but contains an organic that is gassing and
bloating
the middle two bars. L4243: Fires lighter and looks stable here (cone 02,01,1,2 shown) but melts suddenly less than a cone above the top bar (well before
vitrification
is reached). L4242 (right): Hyper-plastic, with 12% drying shrinkage! Already melting by cone 02 (third from top). Achieves almost zero
porosity
(
porcelain
density) at cone 04 (#2 bar). Even when mixed with 20%
kaolin
and 20%
silica
it still hits zero porosity by
cone 1
. What next? I'll mix L4233 (left) and L4242 (right), that should produce
stoneware
density at cone 02 (about 1% porosity).
How to decide what temperature to fire this clay at?
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
This is an extreme example of firing a clay at many temperatures to get wide-angle view of it. These
SHAB test
bars
characterize
a
terra cotta
body,
L4170B
. While it has a wide firing range its "practical firing window" is much narrower than these fired bars and graph suggest. On paper,
cone 5
hits zero
porosity
. And, in-hand, the bar feels like a
porcelain
. But ware warps during firing and
transparent glazes
will be completely clouded with bubbles (when pieces are glazed inside and out). What about cone 3? Its numbers put it in
stoneware
territory, watertight. But
decomposition
gases still bubble glazes! Cone 2? Much better, it has below 4% porosity (any fitted glaze will make it water-tight), below 6%
fired shrinkage
, still very strong. But there are still issues: Accidental overfiring drastically darkens the color.
Low-fire
commercial glazes
may not work at cone 2. How about cone 02? This is a sweet spot. This body has only 6% porosity (compared to the 11% of
cone 04
). Most low-fire cone 06-04 glazes are still fine at cone 02. And glaze
bubble-clouding
is minimal. What if you must fire this at cone 04? Pieces will be "sponges" with 11% porosity, shrinking only 2% (for low density, poor strength). There is another advantage of firing as high as possible: Glazes and
engobes
bond better. As an example of a low-fire transparent base that works fine on this up to cone 2:
G1916Q
.
Michael Cardew might be turning over in his grave!
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
This post got a lot of negative reaction on social media. To be clear, I work both sides of the fence, making my living on selling prepared glazes and
clay bodies
but I get my satisfaction being closer to the materials and processes. That is what enables me to give customer support. I am not an artist, ceramic art is outside the scope of this page. For part of my life in the craft of pottery I am also guilty of what I lament below. In all my years dealing with customer traffic at our store I have never once had a customer that was offended by seeing new clay and
glaze recipes
we are discovering in the studio and lab, that are better and cheaper than prepared ones. But online some are somehow offended by what follows. 80 manufacturers are selling convenience and encouraging disconnection - although I work for one of them I am a voice of caution about this.
This book was once a “Bible” of hobby and professional potters. They were independent and resourceful. They made their own clays and glazes, knew the materials, built their own kilns. Now we scan social media sites for ideas on layering expensive prepared goopy
brushing glazes
and hope they melt together into something presentable. Many have even forgotten how to wedge clay properly. We describe processes using mystical art language and exchange likes and poor advice on social media. Those who still know how to retotal a recipe and venture into mixing their own often end up in the online
trafficking
of an endless parade of recipes that don’t work. Now we even outsource design to
AI
. Even Nigeria, the very country about whom Cardew wrote, has lost its pottery tradition.
I never appreciated the book back there. Even though he came to visit us in 1973. I have always just taken whatever clay I needed out of our warehouse, but now that I very often make my own clay it really resonates. I got this copy on eBay, I value it as an inspiration to be more closely connected with the planet and the minerals it gifts us (of course I would not do everything as he does). He was no dinosaur, he understood and taught
glaze chemistry
and material
mineralogy
, his work was the basis for many prepared glazes we buy today. "Progress" is defined by some as convenience products that make modern
ceramics
easy. But I believe that, for many, progress is arming yourself with a little more understanding - it enables making better quality ware, in less time, for less expense and time than with prepared products.
Personal size sieve shakers you can buy on Amazon
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
These are small-scale devices that work on the same principles as industrial ones - thus they put industrial methods of clay processing in the hands of a potter or hobbyist. These products are stainless steel and food grade and most can be used with powders or shurries and have interchangeable screens. The most expensive device here costs $5000 and the least expensive is far less than $1000.  The suppliers of each of these also have other similar machines (as well as other types of processing equipment potentially valuable in small-scale ceramic production).
DIY clay bodies via slurry mixing:
Consider the advantages.
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Consider the advantages of making your own
clay bodies
using a
propeller mixer
and
plaster table
.
-Independence: You control product availability, quality and consistency.
-Flexibility: You control the recipe (with our help if needed). Fine-tune and adjust it over time to fit your needs and compensate for variations in material properties and supply.
-Special-purpose clay bodies are possible, ones that
ceramic suppliers
do not or cannot make.
-The
slurry up
process achieves better mixing and deairing than any
pugmill
. No aging needed.
-A mixer and
plaster
table are useful for so many other things in a pottery studio.
-Achieving the right stiffness is an integral part of the process.
-Recycling scrap, by
slaking
, fits the process.
-Local native clays: Slurries enable the use of a magnet to remove iron, a
sieve
to remove particulates and a
settling
process to remove
soluble salts
.
-Cleanup is easy so many kinds of clay can be made without cross contamination.
-It is rewarding - you will own the whole process, the bragging rights alone make it worthwhile for me!
Links
Glossary
Characterization
In
ceramics
, this normally refers to the process of doing physical or chemical testing on a raw material to accurately describe it in terms of similar ones.
Glossary
Propeller Mixer
In ceramic studios, labs and classrooms, a good
propeller mixer
is essential for mixing glaze and body slurries.
Glossary
Plaster table
Essential in a pottery studio for dewatering reclaim clay, stiffening clay that is too soft or making your own
clay bodies
.
Glossary
Soluble Salts
In
ceramics
, certain compounds in clays and glazes can dissolve into the water, then on drying these are left on the surface.
Glossary
Clay body
A term used by potters and in the ceramic industry. It refers to the
earthenware
,
stoneware
or
porcelain
that forms the piece (as opposed to the
engobe
and covering glaze).
Glossary
Brick Making
Brick-making is surprisingly demanding. Materials blending and processing, forming, drying and firing heavy and thick objects as fast as possible are like no other ceramic manufacturing challenge.
Tests
Shrinkage/Absorption Test
SHAB Shrinkage and absorption test procedure for plastic
clay bodies
and materials
Articles
Formulating a Porcelain
The principles behind formulating a
porcelain
are quite simple. You just need to know the purpose of each material, a starting recipe and a testing regimen.
Articles
How to Find and Test Your Own Native Clays
Some of the key tests needed to really understand what a clay is and what it can be used for can be done with inexpensive equipment and simple procedures. These practical tests can give you a better picture than a data sheet full of numbers.
Projects
Slurry Mixing and Dewatering Your Own Clay Body
Weigh out the ingredients, mix them using your
propeller mixer
and then dewater and fine-tune the stiffness on your
plaster table
.
URLs
https://insight-live.com/insight/help/It+Starts+With+a+Lump+of+Clay-433.html
Case Study: Testing a
Native Clay
Using
Insight-Live
.com
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy