Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Articles
A ChatBot gives jaw-dropping glaze recipe advice - Jan 2025
A Low Cost Tester of Glaze Melt Fluidity
A One-speed Lab or Studio Slurry Mixer
A Textbook Cone 6 Matte Glaze With Problems
Adjusting Glaze Expansion by Calculation to Solve Shivering
Alberta Slip, 20 Years of Substitution for Albany Slip
An Overview of Ceramic Stains
Are You in Control of Your Production Process?
Are Your Glazes Food Safe or are They Leachable?
Attack on Glass: Corrosion Attack Mechanisms
Ball Milling Glazes, Bodies, Engobes
Binders for Ceramic Bodies
Bringing Out the Big Guns in Craze Control: MgO (G1215U)
Can We Help You Fix a Specific Problem?
Ceramic Glazes Today
Ceramic Material Nomenclature
Ceramic Tile Clay Body Formulation
Changing Our View of Glazes
Chemistry vs. Matrix Blending to Create Glazes from Native Materials
Concentrate on One Good Glaze
Copper Red Glazes
Crazing and Bacteria: Is There a Hazard?
Crazing in Stoneware Glazes: Treating the Causes, Not the Symptoms
Creating a Non-Glaze Ceramic Slip or Engobe
Creating Your Own Budget Glaze
Crystal Glazes: Understanding the Process and Materials
Deflocculants: A Detailed Overview
Demonstrating Glaze Fit Issues to Students
Diagnosing a Casting Problem at a Sanitaryware Plant
Drying Ceramics Without Cracks
Duplicating Albany Slip
Duplicating AP Green Fireclay
Electric Hobby Kilns: What You Need to Know
Fighting the Glaze Dragon
Firing Clay Test Bars
Firing: What Happens to Ceramic Ware in a Firing Kiln
First You See It Then You Don't: Raku Glaze Stability
Fixing a glaze that does not stay in suspension
Formulating a body using clays native to your area
Formulating a Clear Glaze Compatible with Chrome-Tin Stains
Formulating a Porcelain
Formulating Ash and Native-Material Glazes
G1214M Cone 5-7 20x5 glossy transparent glaze
G1214W Cone 6 transparent glaze
G1214Z Cone 6 matte glaze
G1916M Cone 06-04 transparent glaze
Getting the Glaze Color You Want: Working With Stains
Glaze and Body Pigments and Stains in the Ceramic Tile Industry
Glaze Chemistry Basics - Formula, Analysis, Mole%, Unity
Glaze chemistry using a frit of approximate analysis
Glaze Recipes: Formulate and Make Your Own Instead
Glaze Types, Formulation and Application in the Tile Industry
Having Your Glaze Tested for Toxic Metal Release
High Gloss Glazes
Hire Us for a 3D Printing Project
How a Material Chemical Analysis is Done
How desktop INSIGHT Deals With Unity, LOI and Formula Weight
How to Find and Test Your Own Native Clays
I have always done it this way!
Inkjet Decoration of Ceramic Tiles
Is Your Fired Ware Safe?
Leaching Cone 6 Glaze Case Study
Limit Formulas and Target Formulas
Low Budget Testing of Ceramic Glazes
Make Your Own Ball Mill Stand
Making Glaze Testing Cones
Monoporosa or Single Fired Wall Tiles
Organic Matter in Clays: Detailed Overview
Outdoor Weather Resistant Ceramics
Painting Glazes Rather Than Dipping or Spraying
Particle Size Distribution of Ceramic Powders
Porcelain Tile, Vitrified Tile
Rationalizing Conflicting Opinions About Plasticity
Ravenscrag Slip is Born
Recylcing Scrap Clay
Reducing the Firing Temperature of a Glaze From Cone 10 to 6
Setting up a Clay Testing Program in Your Company or Studio
Simple Physical Testing of Clays
Single Fire Glazing
Soluble Salts in Minerals: Detailed Overview
Some Keys to Dealing With Firing Cracks
Stoneware Casting Body Recipes
Substituting Cornwall Stone
Super-Refined Terra Sigillata
The Chemistry, Physics and Manufacturing of Glaze Frits
The Effect of Glaze Fit on Fired Ware Strength
The Four Levels on Which to View Ceramic Glazes
The Majolica Earthenware Process
The Potter's Prayer
The Right Chemistry for a Cone 6 Magnesia Matte
The Trials of Being the Only Technical Person in the Club
The Whining Stops Here: A Realistic Look at Clay Bodies
Those Unlabelled Bags and Buckets
Tiles and Mosaics for Potters
Toxicity of Firebricks Used in Ovens
Trafficking in Glaze Recipes
Understanding Ceramic Materials
Understanding Ceramic Oxides
Understanding Glaze Slurry Properties
Understanding the Deflocculation Process in Slip Casting
Understanding the Terra Cotta Slip Casting Recipes In North America
Understanding Thermal Expansion in Ceramic Glazes
Unwanted Crystallization in a Cone 6 Glaze
Using Dextrin, Glycerine and CMC Gum together
Volcanic Ash
What Determines a Glaze's Firing Temperature?
What is a Mole, Checking Out the Mole
What is the Glaze Dragon?
Where do I start in understanding glazes?
Why Textbook Glazes Are So Difficult
Working with children
Low Budget Testing of Ceramic Glazes
Description
There is more to glazes than their visual character, they have other physical properties like hardness, thermal expansion, leachability, chemistry and they exhibit many defects. Here are some simple tests.
Article
What if you could greatly increase the quality of your fired ware by only small changes? Would you do it? Testing it thoroughly is a key ingredient. But mention the idea of testing a glaze and 99% of us think in terms of dipping a test tile and firing it to see how it looks. Many have learned that there is often little correlation between how a glaze looks on a little test tile compared with how it looks when used on ware, thus they tend to put little effort into testing. However if you already have a glaze in production, or have made an adjustment to an existing one, you are likely willing to expend much more effort to evaluate it fully.
Raw and fired glazes exhibit many properties that both production and end users are knowingly or unknowingly concerned with. These include
slurry
properties, dry hardness, behavior of
the melt
, freezing characteristics, hardness and scratch resistance of the fired glass, compatibility of host glaze and added
colorants
, leach resistance,
glaze fit
with the body, clarity of the fired glass, etc. Certain factors such susceptibility to material change and varying firing conditions are more difficult to measure.
Most people and companies do not have fancy glaze testing equipment to evaluate these properties. It is to these that this article is directed, there is much you can do to greatly increase your confidence in the true 'quality' of your product. Testing your glaze thoroughly is doubly important if you are using one or two
base glazes
because, in a sense, you have all your 'quality eggs in one basket'. We 'hoot' a lot about the advantages of focusing your efforts on one base glossy and matte recipe and altering these to make whatever you want. Thus the following tests all assume and depend on the fact that you are testing the transparent base without any colorants,
opacifiers
, or other additives. Remember that improving the base improves every recipe that is based on it.
Here are some tests you should consider:
Slurry Properties
Mix a small pail of the glaze and bring it to the proper consistency (I am assuming you are glazing
bisque
ware). Most glazes work best when there is enough water to make them fluid and not so much that they do not gel. Typically you should be able to stir a glaze with a stick, pull the stick out, and the slurry should remain in motion only for 2-4 seconds. Measure its
specific gravity
and record this amount. If in future the glaze gels, settles, or runs excessively check its specific gravity. If it is correct then you need to investigate changes in your water supply or dry materials that could flocculate or
deflocculate
the slurry.
Let the container of glaze sit overnight and check it the next day for any tendency to settle or gel excessively. If it settles incorporate some
bentonite
in the recipe. If it gels to the point that remixing does not thin it out then replace materials known to be soluble (i.e.
Gerstley Borate
,
Nepheline Syenite
) or use distilled water.
Application Properties
Dip your dry finger into the slurry and pull it out. Only one or two drips should fall and a good layer of glaze should hold itself in place. For glazes intended for application to bisque ware, dip a thick test tile (2 cm thick) all the way in for two seconds, pull it out and turn it over and watch for any tendency to run and drip. Note how quick it dries. When dry dip it again half way and hold it in for several seconds. Set it out to dry and note any tendency of the glaze cover to crack during drying (this is an indication of too much clay or too plastic clay in the recipe). When the specimen is completely dry note its tendency to 'powder off' in your hands. Will it accept
overglaze
painted decoration without turning to mud or will wax resist paint on and hang on well (if not the clay content is either too low or not plastic enough).
Dip a thin test tile also (5mm thick or less) and apply thick and thin layers as above (the tile should be thin enough so that the clay becomes waterlogged and the glaze thus dries slowly). Note any tendency of the glaze to bubble as it dries, this indicates that the specific gravity of the glaze may be too low.
Crystallization, Clarity, Crawling
Fire the thick and thin test specimens made above. The thick one will cool slower, note any tendency for it to
devitrify
(develop crystals) compared to the thin one. Note any tendency toward
crawling
on the thickly glazed sections of the specimens, especially near edges. Note any tendency of the glaze to cloud with bubbles in the thicker areas.
Stain Compatibility
Using a small brush paint stain ID numbers and color swatches on a flat tile of the target
clay body
. Glaze the whole tile over with a transparent version of the
base glaze
you are testing and fire. Note colors that are off and research the required
chemistry
to explain why.
Leaching
Add a
colorant
like cobalt to a transparent version of the glaze being test, make and fire a bowl, fill it with vinegar and leave it in a warm place for twenty four hours. Note any fading of color, reformulate and test again till no
leaching
occurs.
Hardness
Take a sharp concrete nail and attempt to scratch the glaze. Compare its performance against a benchmark glaze that has proven to be durable. Or use a hardened steel file to attempt to remove glaze on the lip or corner of a piece.
Cutlery Marking
Using the edge of a stainless spoon or fork attempt to mark the surface of the glaze. If it marks attempt to rub or clean the mark off. If you cannot consider reformulating the glaze to develop a smoother surface or fewer crystals,
flux
it to melt more, or fire it higher.
Crazing, Shivering
Cycle a thin glazed shard of your body-glaze combination between three-minute immersions in boiling water and ice water. Do it three times. Use a black marker to color an area of the surface. Clean the ink off using methyl hydrate. Note any
craze
lines highlighted by the ink. Note any areas near edges that may be flaking off (
shivering
). Reformulate the glaze to reduce its
thermal expansion
(increase it for shivering), fire, and test again.
Glaze Over Solubles
Prepare a 12cm diameter disk 5mm thick from your clay and dry it under a fan with the center 6 cm covered. Any
soluble salts
in your clay body will be amplified on the outer 3cm ring. Break the disk in half, glaze half, and support and fire it resting on the flat. Note any reaction between the soluble salts in your clay and the glaze (i.e.
blistering
,
orange peeling
).
Flow
Check the flow of the melt using a flow tester.
Fired Volatility
Many glazes work well at one temperature but if fired slightly higher or lower they can have a much different surface. This type of behavior is normally only tolerated in very special purpose glazes. Thus you should prepare sample tiles for firing one cone higher and lower than you working temperature. This will help you spot possible trouble in future if kiln firings are not totally consistent.
Microscope
Using a $20 30X Lightscope (available at hardware stores) look carefully at the glaze surface for any signs of poor melting (especially in matte glazes) or surface pits that could harbor bacteria. Identify any tiny specks as either impurities or the first stages of crystals. Break a shard and check for a good
interface
between glaze and clay. Examine any scratches you were able to make with the concrete nail.
Make
Functional
Ware
Mix a couple of gallons of the base glaze and make a variety of functional ceramic shapes, glaze, and fire them. Note any problems like
pinholing
, crawling,
bubbling
,
devitrification
, and blistering.
Related Information
Feldspars, the primary high temperature flux, melt less than you think.
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
Our
melt fluidity tester
is being used to compare cone 8 melt fluidities of Custer, G-200 and i-Minerals high soda and high potassium
feldspars
. Notice how little the pure materials are moving (bottom), even though they are fired to cone 11. In addition, the sodium feldspars move better than the potassium ones. But feldspars do their real fluxing work when they can interact with other materials. As a demonstration of that, note how well they flow with only 10%
frit
added (top), even though fired three cones lower.
Confirming slip viscosity using a paint-measuring device
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
A
Ford Cup
is being using to measure the
viscosity
of a
casting slip
. These are available at paint supply stores. This is a #4 (4.25mm opening), it holds 100ml and drains water in 10 seconds. This casting slip has a
specific gravity
of 1.79. Having made it many times, our experience indicates 40-seconds as a drain target (after high energy mixing). In production situations, the seconds-value this test produces enables an audit-trail for quality control and problem solving. When first mixing a
slurry
, under-deflocculating and eye-balling the viscosity is typical, during that period the slurry gels while draining and Ford cup measurements are not valid. When the mixing process has been perfected and viscosity stabilized the Ford Cup becomes practical.
Don’t overthink this type of measurement or the type of cup or opening size (you can even make your own cup). You must still determine the optimal flow rate based on experience with your process. This technique is more about maintaining to ongoing adherence to a standard you define.
A batch of fired clay test bars in the Plainsman Clays lab
This picture has its own page with more detail,
click here
to see it.
A batch of fired test bars that have just been boiled and weighed, from these we get
dry shrinkage
,
fired shrinkage
and
porosity
. Each pile is a different mix, fired to various temperatures. Test runs are on the left, production runs on the right. Each bar is stamped with a
code number
and specimen number (the different specimens are the different temperatures). The measurements have all been entered into our group account at
insight-live
.com. Now I have to lay out and photograph each pile and upload the picture into the code-numbered record. Upon doing so I compare color and tests results to make decisions on what to do next (documenting these in insight-live).
Links
Articles
Limit Formulas and Target Formulas
Glaze chemistries for each type of glaze have a typical look to them that enables us to spot ones that are non-typical. Limit and target formulas are useful to us if we keep in perspective their proper use.
Articles
A Low Cost Tester of Glaze Melt Fluidity
Use this novel device to compare the
melt fluidity
of glazes and materials. Simple physical observations of the results provide a better understanding of the fired properties of your glaze (and problems you did not see before).
Projects
Tests
Projects
Frits
Troubles
Glaze Marks or Scratches
Questions to ask and strategies to try to deal with glaze
cutlery marking
, that is, glazes that are too easily scatched by metal.
Glossary
Characterization
In
ceramics
, this normally refers to the process of doing physical or chemical testing on a raw material to accurately describe it in terms of similar ones.
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy