Digitalfire will shut down on June 26. I no longer have the authority to grant exemption to a section in the Terms and Conditions of using material in the Insight-Live account from which I built the source material. While there are ways to comply with the take-down order, they are beyond my means because of how complex and large the site has become in the past 35+ years. It has been a wild ride for a shy prairie boy, thanks to everyone for your support. Insight-live.com is not affected by this.
All Articles
A ChatBot gives jaw-dropping glaze recipe advice - Jan 2025
A Low Cost Tester of Glaze Melt Fluidity
A One-speed Lab or Studio Slurry Mixer
A Textbook Cone 6 Matte Glaze With Problems
Adjusting Glaze Expansion by Calculation to Solve Shivering
Alberta Slip, 20 Years of Substitution for Albany Slip
An Overview of Ceramic Stains
Are You in Control of Your Production Process?
Are Your Glazes Food Safe or are They Leachable?
Attack on Glass: Corrosion Attack Mechanisms
Ball Milling Glazes, Bodies, Engobes
Binders for Ceramic Bodies
Bringing Out the Big Guns in Craze Control: MgO (G1215U)
Can We Help You Fix a Specific Problem?
Ceramic Glazes Today
Ceramic Material Nomenclature
Ceramic Tile Clay Body Formulation
Changing Our View of Glazes
Chemistry vs. Matrix Blending to Create Glazes from Native Materials
Concentrate on One Good Glaze
Copper Red Glazes
Crazing and Bacteria: Is There a Hazard?
Crazing in Stoneware Glazes: Treating the Causes, Not the Symptoms
Creating a Non-Glaze Ceramic Slip or Engobe
Creating Your Own Budget Glaze
Crystal Glazes: Understanding the Process and Materials
Deflocculants: A Detailed Overview
Demonstrating Glaze Fit Issues to Students
Diagnosing a Casting Problem at a Sanitaryware Plant
Drying Ceramics Without Cracks
Duplicating Albany Slip
Duplicating AP Green Fireclay
Electric Hobby Kilns: What You Need to Know
Fighting the Glaze Dragon
Firing Clay Test Bars
Firing: What Happens to Ceramic Ware in a Firing Kiln
First You See It Then You Don't: Raku Glaze Stability
Fixing a glaze that does not stay in suspension
Formulating a body using clays native to your area
Formulating a Clear Glaze Compatible with Chrome-Tin Stains
Formulating a Porcelain
Formulating Ash and Native-Material Glazes
G1214M Cone 5-7 20x5 glossy transparent glaze
G1214W Cone 6 transparent glaze
G1214Z Cone 6 matte glaze
G1916M Cone 06-04 transparent glaze
Getting the Glaze Color You Want: Working With Stains
Glaze and Body Pigments and Stains in the Ceramic Tile Industry
Glaze Chemistry Basics - Formula, Analysis, Mole%, Unity
Glaze chemistry using a frit of approximate analysis
Glaze Recipes: Formulate and Make Your Own Instead
Glaze Types, Formulation and Application in the Tile Industry
Having Your Glaze Tested for Toxic Metal Release
High Gloss Glazes
Hire Us for a 3D Printing Project
How a Material Chemical Analysis is Done
How desktop INSIGHT Deals With Unity, LOI and Formula Weight
How to Find and Test Your Own Native Clays
I have always done it this way!
Inkjet Decoration of Ceramic Tiles
Is Your Fired Ware Safe?
Leaching Cone 6 Glaze Case Study
Limit Formulas and Target Formulas
Low Budget Testing of Ceramic Glazes
Make Your Own Ball Mill Stand
Making Glaze Testing Cones
Monoporosa or Single Fired Wall Tiles
Organic Matter in Clays: Detailed Overview
Outdoor Weather Resistant Ceramics
Painting Glazes Rather Than Dipping or Spraying
Particle Size Distribution of Ceramic Powders
Porcelain Tile, Vitrified Tile
Rationalizing Conflicting Opinions About Plasticity
Ravenscrag Slip is Born
Recylcing Scrap Clay
Reducing the Firing Temperature of a Glaze From Cone 10 to 6
Setting up a Clay Testing Program in Your Company or Studio
Simple Physical Testing of Clays
Single Fire Glazing
Soluble Salts in Minerals: Detailed Overview
Some Keys to Dealing With Firing Cracks
Stoneware Casting Body Recipes
Substituting Cornwall Stone
Super-Refined Terra Sigillata
The Chemistry, Physics and Manufacturing of Glaze Frits
The Effect of Glaze Fit on Fired Ware Strength
The Four Levels on Which to View Ceramic Glazes
The Majolica Earthenware Process
The Potter's Prayer
The Right Chemistry for a Cone 6 Magnesia Matte
The Trials of Being the Only Technical Person in the Club
The Whining Stops Here: A Realistic Look at Clay Bodies
Those Unlabelled Bags and Buckets
Tiles and Mosaics for Potters
Toxicity of Firebricks Used in Ovens
Trafficking in Glaze Recipes
Understanding Ceramic Materials
Understanding Ceramic Oxides
Understanding Glaze Slurry Properties
Understanding the Deflocculation Process in Slip Casting
Understanding the Terra Cotta Slip Casting Recipes In North America
Understanding Thermal Expansion in Ceramic Glazes
Unwanted Crystallization in a Cone 6 Glaze
Using Dextrin, Glycerine and CMC Gum together
Volcanic Ash
What Determines a Glaze's Firing Temperature?
What is a Mole, Checking Out the Mole
What is the Glaze Dragon?
Where do I start in understanding glazes?
Why Textbook Glazes Are So Difficult
Working with children
Understanding the Terra Cotta Slip Casting Recipes In North America
Description
This article helps you understand a good recipe for a red casting body so that you will have control and adjustability.
Article
In North America there is a raw material that makes the creation of a low
fire red
casting body
very easy. It is called
Redart
. This clay is air floated,
high in iron, low in
soluble salts
and matures at a low temperature (around cone
1). In addition Redart deflocculates very well. Adding
iron oxide
to a clay
causes it to gel badly on dispersion however the natural form of iron in Redart
does not do this at all. To use the casting process efficiently you must understand how
deflocculation
works. Believe me, if you are new to casting and have never mixed a heavy
casting slip
with low
water content
you will never go back to a simple clay
water mix again after you learn the deflocculation process (see the link to an
article on this).
Although it is possible, there are a number reasons why you would not
normally use a 100% Redart formula.
Redart
plasticity
and dry strength are quite low so added
ball clay
is
    needed
If you need to fit
commercial glazes
you need to increase the thermal
    expansion of Redart, this is done by adding talc
Using a body of one ingredient only is asking for trouble. Materials do
    vary and it is best to have a body that is a mix so that variation in any
    one material is diluted by the others.
There are many advantages to having some sort of non-plastic filler in the
    body, especially for casting since it speeds up the casting rate and
    improves
drying performance
.
Red Casting Powder Starting Recipe
Redart     50
Ball Clay  25
Talc
25
Recipe Notes
IMCO makes a red
low fire
clay named Banta that is much more plastic, you
    could restore some color by using it in place of the ball clay.
This is one time where you actually want to use a dirty talc and ball
    clay, that is, ones that contain some iron.
Since the Redart has been cut to 50% of the recipe it stands to reason
    that the body will only fire half as red. However keep in mind that the iron
    color does not really begin to develop into a bright red until cone 03-02,
    so if you are firing lower than this the color is not as much lighter as you
    might think it would be.
The talc does improve the casting performance and working properties of
    the body so it is a desirable ingredient.
You can adapt this body to higher temperatures by changing the talc to
feldspar
and reducing the amount of Redart in favor of
kaolin
and
silica
.
If you can find a non-plastic finely ground red burning filler (i.e. a
    shale, argilitic rock, etc), this could be the secret to the reddest
    possible color. Note that there are red burning ball clays on the market
    also.
If you find that a white burning scum deposits on the surface after drying
    you may need to add about 0.3%
barium carbonate
to the dry mix, it will
    precipitate the soluble salts inside the body so they do not come to the
    surface during drying.
Terra Cotta Process Considerations
At
cone 06
almost any mix not containing expensive fluxes is going to be
non-vitreous and highly porous. However by 04 this figure drops dramatically. By
cone 03-02 it is possible to have
stoneware
properties in most terra cottas. This
is because natural red clays contain so much
flux
. Consider some of the
considerations you must think about when formulating a
terra cotta
casting body.
Body color is usually important, people want the deepest possible shade of red in their terra cotta. If you are using commercial glazes fit is a big issue and the body needs to have significant talc, up to 50%. This is not a problem for white bodies since you can couple it with white burning plastic ball clay. But for red bodies it is a challenge because there is not enough room in the recipe for flux given the amount of clay needed to achieve
workability (the lower plasticity red plus the ball clay). This means you have a tug of war between color, fit of commercial glazes,
maturity
and workability. An obvious way to ease things is to formulate your own glazes, this enables removing the talc completely.
As mentioned, you cannot just add iron to a white burning clay to get terra
cotta color since iron causes slip to severely gel. In my experience you need to use at least 50% dark red clay and deal with the opposing issues of maturity and
working properties in the remainder. In North America the primary red clay used in terra cotta bodies is Redart. It casts very well but it is
just not plastic enough so you may need to augment it with ball clay to create a slip that has
adequate dry strength and shrinkage to pull away from the mold. However to get a dark enough color you normally want a high proportion of red clay.
If you can fit a glaze to the talcless version of the body, you may be able to
work with a recipe of up to 80% red clay and 20% ball clay.
However it is not typical to fire
earthenware
this high since color and
resistance to warp change dramatically with only slight over firing and the red
color is lost under
transparent glazes
. The beautiful red colors depend on stopping well short of
vitrification
. Many commercial wares are 6-8%
porosity
and yet they are very
strong, so do not worry about higher-than-stoneware porosity that is common with
earthenware. Just make sure the glaze fits (can survive a hot water:ice water test) and strengthens the ware.
In terra cotta bodies the glaze is not nearly as well interfaced and adhered
to the body as with stonewares. Glazes are dramatically more prone to
crazing
,
shivering
and chipping off. To make good quality earthenware requires much more
technical glaze knowledge than for making stoneware.
Combining Casting a
Thrown
or Hand-build Elements
This is a very practical aspect of terra cotta. Some commercial terra cotta
throwing
bodies will
deflocculate
. However you will find that elements cast from
the recipe given here can be joined onto
leather hard
objects using the casting
slip itself as a glue. You may need to adjust the recipe to match color it ware
is not to be glazed.
Deflocculation
Deflocculation refers to the magic process of creating a
slurry
with only
half the amount of water that would normally be necessary (see the link to an
article on this topic). Generally you measure the water and put it into a
container, start your
propeller mixer
and add most but not all of the
deflocculant. Then you add the powder body mix. The slurry becomes very heavy so
you need a powerful mixer than can run for hours. Getting the last bit of powder
to mix in can take some time so patience is required.
Powder Mix
100
Water
36.0% of dry amt
Soda Ash
0.05-.1% of dry amt
Sodium Silicate
about 0.2 to 0.3% of dry amt
or
Water
36% of dry amt
Darvan
0.5% of dry amt
Note that water and deflocculant amounts are examples, you need to know how
to measure
specific gravity
and
viscosity
to adapt their amounts to your
materials and water (see the article on deflocculation for more information).
Being Realistic
Terra cotta ware is never going to be anywhere near as strong as stoneware.
Terra cotta is a matter of tradition and getting a nice warm red colored body.
Terra cotta is much stronger than white burning earthenware and aesthetically it
goes well with brightly decorated light colored opacified glazes. If you can
make fine quality earthenware then you can be proud, it is not an easy job.
Related Information
Links
Articles
Stoneware Casting Body Recipes
Some starting recipes for
stoneware
and
porcelain
with information on how to adjust and adapt them
Articles
Understanding the Deflocculation Process in Slip Casting
Understanding the magic of
deflocculation
and how to measure
specific gravity
and
viscosity
, and how to interpret the results of these tests to adjust the slip, these are the key to controlling a casting process.
Materials
Redart
The most common commercially
200 mesh
available raw
terra cotta
clay in North America. It fires red, has low
plasticity
and matures a low kiln temperatures.
Materials
Banta Red Clay
Materials
Sodium Silicate
A sticky, viscous liquid. The most common deflocculant used in
ceramics
. Also used as a bonding agent.
Glossary
Deflocculation
Deflocculation
is the magic behind the ceramic casting process, it enables slurries having impossibly low water contents and ware having amazingly low drying shrinkage
Projects
Troubles
PayPal
No
tracking,
No
ads,
No
paywall,
No
transient content!
Just organized, concise information constantly updated and improved.
Was this helpful? Consider supporting me.
By
Tony Hansen
Follow me on
Got a Question?
Buy me a coffee and we can talk
https://digitalfire.com
, All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy